More than just digital paper—hidden features of the PDF format 
Dietrich von Seggern 
Vice Chair, PDF Association 
callas software 
Berlin, Germany 
d.seggern@callassoftware.com 
Tamir Hassan 
Member, PDF Association 
Round-Trip PDF Solutions 
Vienna, Austria 
tamir@roundtrippdf.com 
ABSTRACT 
PDF has long been established as the de facto format for the ex-change of print-oriented documents and is known for its robust visual presentation across a variety of operating systems and plat-forms. 
However, relatively few users are familiar with the format’s newer features, such as tagging, forms and security. This tutorial aims to give an overview of the most important of these features and demonstrate the benefts of creating and exchanging PDF fles that make use of them. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Applied computing → Publishing; Document preparation; KEYWORDS 
PDF, Tagging, Machine-readable structure, Workfows, Document formats 
ACM Reference Format: 
Dietrich von Seggern, Klaas Posselt, Tamir Hassan, and Thomas Zellmann. 2019. More than just digital paper—hidden features of the PDF format. In ACM Symposium on Document Engineering 2019 (DocEng ’19), September 23–26, 2019, Berlin, Germany. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2 pages. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3342558.3351873 
1 SUMMARY PDF is the most common fle format on the Web after HTML, and everyone in the Document Engineering community without excep-tion has to deal with the format in one way or another. Just about everyone is familiar with PDF being “digital paper,” after all, that is really how it started out. But PDF has become “smarter” in the last few years, yet it is still struggling to shake of its reputation as a purely end-of-line, dumb fle format that is unsuitable for further machine processing. Comparatively few people—and this includes Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
DocEng ’19, September 23–26, 2019, Berlin, Germany 
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6887-2/19/09. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3342558.3351873 
Klaas Posselt 
Member, PDF Association 
digital Prepress & ePublishing Consulting 
Berlin, Germany 
klaas.posselt@einmanncombo.de 
Thomas Zellmann 
Managing Director, PDF Association 
Foxit Europe 
Berlin, Germany 
thomas.zellmann@pdfa.org 
even many DocEng participants who do not work directly with PDF—are not familiar with PDF’s additional features, which have grown over the past few years. 
The aim of this tutorial is to introduce the audience to the most important of these features and give practical examples on how they can beneft from generating and exchanging PDF fles that go beyond digital representations of the printed page. 
The following section lists the topics that were prepared for this half-day tutorial. However, we also plan to ask the audience about what interests them the most and spend more time on those topics. 2 TOPICS • Tagged PDF: Embedding logical structure in PDF for: – accessibility – repurposing of content • Hidden, selectable text for scanned documents via OCR • Structured data (measurements, statistical data) as embed-ded fles 
• Digital, fllable forms in PDF • Object-level metadata; keeping source information for his-tory and license enforcement 
• Commenting workfows (annotations) • Security: Encryption and signatures • Compression algorithms enabling small fle sizes for high-quality images 
• Colour reproduction (if requested by audience) 3 ABOUT THE ORGANIZERS Dietrich von Seggern received his degree as a printing engineer, and in 1991 started his professional career as head of desktop pre-press production in a reproduction house. He became involved in research projects for digital transmission of print fles, and moved to the German Newspaper Marketing Organization (ZMG), where he was responsible for a project to enable the digital transmission of newspaper ads. In 2002 he joined callas software as Director of Product Management, and subsequently introduced callas’ PDF/A related products for the archiving industry. Today, Dietrich is Man-aging Director at callas software, and Vice Chair and ISO Liaison Ofcer at the PDF Association. DocEng ’19, September 23–26, 2019, Berlin, Germany Dietrich von Seggern, Klaas Posselt, Tamir Hassan, and Thomas Zellmann Klaas Posselt is a graduate engineer in printing and media tech-nology who, following a number of lines of inquiry, eventually landed on the subject of universally accessible PDF documents. He trains, assists and supports clients as they implement and optimize publication processes and move towards new digital output chan-nels including ebooks, accessible PDFs and web platforms. As a member of the PDF Association’s PDF/UA Competence Center, he is involved in the ongoing development and growth of the PDF/UA standard for universally accessible PDF documents. 
Tamir Hassan has over a decade of experience in the area of document engineering. After writing his doctoral thesis on the topic User-Guided Information Extraction from Print-Oriented Doc-uments, he worked as a researcher in academia, and more recently in the Printing and Content Delivery Laboratory of HP Labs. He now works as an independent researcher and consultant ofering solutions for round-trip processing of PDF documents (i.e. both the conversion of formatted documents to structured form and the au-tomated creation of of formatted documents from structured con-tent or data). 
Tamir is a regular contributor to DocEng. In 2016, he was the Program Chair and has been active in the Steering Committee since then. He has been a member of the PDF Association since 2017. 
Thomas Zellmann has been working in electronic data pro-cessing (EDP) for more than 30 years and has extensive experience with classic and modern IT solutions. Prior to joining LuraTech/ Foxit in 2001, he worked for Softmatic AG, Software AG and Nix-dorf among others. Thomas focuses on the banking/insurance and archives/libraries segments. As Managing Director of the PDF As-sociation, Thomas coordinates and executes many of the organiza-tion’s activities. 