169

C H A P T E R 

5 Physical Development: 
The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, 
and Sexual Development

An Overview of Maturation and Growth

Development of the Brain

Motor Development

Focus on Research: Sports Participation and Self-Esteem Among Adolescent Females

Puberty: The Physical Transition from Child to Adult

Causes and Correlates of Physical Development

Applying Developmental Themes to Physical Development

“My, my, she is already walking! What a smart little girl!”
“Look at you go. Oops, fall down, go boom!”
“Get your rest, little guy, it will help you grow big and strong.”
“He’s growing like a weed—and his arms are too long!”
“Only 11 and she’s got her period. What’s the world coming to?”
“All that girl thinks about is boys.”

HAVE YOU EVER HEARD adults make these kinds of statements about developing 
children and adolescents? Few aspects of development are more interesting to the casual ob-
server than the rapid transformation of a seemingly dependent and immobile little baby into 
a running, jumping bundle of energy who grows and changes at what may seem to be an as-
tounding pace, and who may one day surpass the physical stature of his or her parents. Those 
physical changes that many find so fascinating are the subject of this chapter.

We will begin by focusing on the changes that occur in the body, the brain, and 
motor skills throughout childhood. Then we will consider the impact of puberty—both 
the dramatic physical changes that adolescents experience and their social and psycho-
logical impacts. Finally, we will end the chapter by discussing the factors that influence 
physical growth and development throughout the first 20 years of life.

Having experienced most (if not all) of the changes covered in this chapter, you 
may assume that you know quite a bit about physical development. Yet students often 
discover that there is much they don’t know. To check your own knowledge, take a 
minute to decide whether the following statements are true or false:

1. Babies who walk early are inclined to be especially bright.
2. The average 2-year-old is already about half of his or her adult height.

170  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

 

• 

• 

3. Half the nerve cells in the average baby’s brain die over the first few years of life.
4. Most children walk when they are ready, and no amount of encouragement will 
enable a 6-month-old to walk alone.
5. A person’s hormones have little effect on human growth and development until 
puberty.
6. Emotional trauma can seriously impair the physical growth of young children, even 
those who are adequately nourished, free from illness, and not physically abused.

Jot down your responses and we will see how you did on this “pretest” as we dis-
cuss these issues throughout the chapter. (If you would like immediate feedback, the 
correct answers appear at the bottom of the page.)

Answers to pretest: 1. F; 2. T; 3. T; 4. T; 5. F; 6. T

An Overview of Maturation and Growth

Adults are often amazed at how quickly children grow. Even tiny babies don’t remain 
tiny for long: in the first few months of life, they gain nearly an ounce each day and 
an inch each month. Yet the dramatic increases in height and weight that we see are 
accompanied by a number of important internal developments in the muscles, bones, 
and central nervous system that will largely determine the physical feats that children 
are capable of performing at different ages. In this section of the chapter, we will briefly 
chart the course of physical development from birth through adolescence and see that 
there is a clear relationship between the external aspects of growth that are so notice-
able and the internal changes that are much harder to detect.

Changes in Height and Weight

Babies grow very rapidly during the first 2 years, often doubling their birth weight by 
4 to 6 months of age and tripling it (to about 21 to 22 pounds) by the end of the 1st 
year. Growth is very uneven in infancy. One study found 
that babies may remain the same length for days or weeks 
at a time before showing spurts of more than a centimeter 
in a single day (Lampl, Veldhuis, & Johnson, 1992). By age 2, 
toddlers are already half their eventual adult height and have 
quadrupled their birth weight to 27 to 30 pounds. If children 
continued to grow at this rapid pace until age 18, they would 
stand at about 12 feet 3 inches and weigh several tons!

From age 2 until puberty, children gain about 2 to 3 
inches in height and 6 to 7 pounds in weight each year. Dur-
ing middle childhood (ages 6 to 11), children may seem to 
grow very little; over an entire year, gains of 2 inches and 
6 pounds are hard to detect on a child who stands 4 to 4½ 
feet tall and weighs 60 to 80 pounds (Eichorn, 1979). But as 
shown in Figure 5.1, physical growth and development are 
once again obvious at puberty, when adolescents enter a 2- 
to 3-year growth spurt, during which they may post an an-
nual gain of 10 to 15 pounds and 2 to 4 inches in height. After 
this large growth spurt, there are typically small increases in 
height until full adult stature is attained in the mid- to late 
teens (Tanner, 1990).

Figure 5.1 Gain in height per year by males and females from 
birth through adolescence. At about age 10½, girls begin 
their growth spurt. Boys follow some 2½ years later and grow 
faster than girls once their growth begins. Based on a figure 
in Archives of the Diseases in Childhood, 41, by J. M. Tanner, 
R. H. Whithouse, and A. Takaishi, 1966, pp. 454–471.

Height gain, cm/yr

20

5

10

15

25

5

Age in years

Girls
Boys

10
15
20

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  171

• 

• 

© Bob Daemmrich/The Image Works 

Changes in Body Proportions

To a casual observer, newborns may appear to be “all head”—and for good reason. 
The newborn’s head is already 70 percent of its eventual adult size and represents one-
quarter of total body length, the same fraction as the legs.

As a child grows, body shape rapidly changes (see Figure 5.2). Development pro-
ceeds in a cephalocaudal (head downward) direction. The trunk grows fastest during the 
1st year. At 1 year of age, a child’s head now accounts for only 20 percent of total body 
length. From the child’s 1st birthday until the adolescent growth spurt, the legs grow rap-
idly, accounting for more than 60 percent of the increase in height (Eichorn, 1979). Dur-
ing adolescence the trunk once again becomes the fastest-growing segment of the body, 
although the legs are also growing rapidly at this time. When we reach our eventual adult 
stature, our legs will account for 50 percent of total height and our heads only 12 percent.

cephalocaudal development
a sequence of physical maturation 
and growth that proceeds from 
the head (cephalic region) to the 
tail (or caudal region).

Figure 5.2 Proportions of the human body from the fetal period through adulthood. The 
head represents 50 percent of body length at 2 months after conception but only 12 to 
13 percent of adult stature. In contrast, the legs constitute about 12 to 13 percent of the 
total length of a 2-month-old fetus, but 50 percent of the height of a 25-year-old adult.

2 months
(fetal)
5 months
(fetal)
newborn
2 years
6 years
12 years
25 years

© Cengage Learning

While children grow upward, they are also growing outward in a proximodistal 
(center outward) direction (Kohler & Rigby, 2003). During prenatal development, for 
example, the chest and internal organs form first, followed by the arms and legs, 
and then the hands and feet. Throughout infancy and childhood, the arms and legs 
continue to grow faster than the hands and feet. However, this center-outward 
growth pattern reverses just before puberty, when the hands and feet begin to 
grow rapidly and become the first body parts to reach adult proportions, followed 
by the arms and legs and, finally, the trunk. One reason teenagers often appear so 
clumsy or awkward is that their hands and feet (and later their arms and legs) may 
suddenly seem much too large for the rest of their bodies (Tanner, 1990).

proximodistal development
a sequence of physical matura-
tion and growth that proceeds 
from the center of the body (the 
proximal region) to the extremities 
(distal regions).

Body proportions change rapidly over 
the first few years as chubby toddlers 
become long-legged children.

Skeletal Development

The skeletal structures that form during the prenatal period are initially soft car-
tilage that will gradually ossify (harden) into bony material. At birth, most of the 
infant’s bones are soft, pliable, and difficult to break. One reason that newborns 
cannot sit up or balance themselves when pulled to a standing position is that 
their bones are too small and too flexible.

The neonate’s skull consists of several soft bones that can be compressed to 
allow the child to pass through the cervix and the birth canal, making childbirth 
easier for the mother and the baby. These skull bones are separated by six soft 

172  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

• 

• 

• 

• 

spots, or fontanelles, that are gradually filled in by minerals to form a single skull by 
age 2, with pliable points at the seams where skull bones join. These seams, or sutures, 
allow the skull to expand as the brain grows larger.

Other parts of the body—namely, the ankles, feet, wrists and hands—develop 
more (rather than fewer) bones as the child matures. In 
Figure 5.3, we see that the 
wrist and hand bones of a 1-year-old are both fewer and less interconnected than the 
corresponding skeletal equipment of an adolescent.

Figure 5.3 X-rays showing the 
amount of skeletal development 
seen in (A) the hand of an 
average male infant at 12 months 
or an average female infant at 
10 months and (B) the hand of 
an average 13-year-old male or an 
average 10½-year-old female.

A
B

© Cengage Learning

One method of estimating a child’s level of physical maturation is to X-ray his or 
her wrist and hand (as in Figure 5.3). The X-ray shows the number of bones and the 
extent of their ossification, which is then interpretable as a skeletal age.  Using this 
technique, researchers have found that girls mature faster than boys. At birth, girls are 
only 4 to 6 weeks ahead of boys in their level of skeletal development; but by age 12, 
the gender difference has widened to 2 full years (Tanner, 1990).

skeletal age
a measure of physical maturation 
based on the child’s level of skel-
etal development.

Not all parts of the skeleton grow and harden at the same rate. The skull and hands 
mature first, whereas the leg bones continue to develop until the mid- to late teens. 
For all practical purposes, skeletal development is complete by age 18, although the 
widths (or thicknesses) of the skull, leg bones, and hands increase slightly throughout 
life (Tanner, 1990).

Muscular Development

Newborns are born with all the muscle fibers they will ever 
have (Tanner, 1990). At birth, muscle tissue is 35 percent 
water, and it accounts for no more than 18 to 24 percent of a 
baby’s body weight (Marshall, 1977). However, muscle fibers 
soon begin to grow as the cellular fluid in muscle tissue is 
bolstered by the addition of protein and salts.

Muscular development proceeds in cephalocaudal and 
proximodistal directions, with muscles in the head and neck 
maturing before those in the trunk and limbs. Like many 
other aspects of physical development, the maturation of 
muscle tissue occurs very gradually over childhood and then 
accelerates during early adolescence. One consequence of 
this muscular growth spurt is that members of both sexes 
become noticeably stronger, although increases in both mus-
cle mass and physical strength (as measured in tests of large-
muscle activity) are more dramatic for boys than for girls 
(Malina, 1990). By the mid-20s, skeletal muscle accounts for 
40 percent of the body weight of an average male, compared 
with 24 percent for the average female.

Variations in Physical Development

To this point, we have been discussing sequences of physi-
cal growth that all humans display. However, physical devel-
opment is a very uneven process in which different bodily 
systems display unique growth patterns. As we see in Fig-
ure 5.4, the brain and head actually grow much faster and 
are quicker to reach adult proportions than the rest of the 
body, whereas the genitals and other reproductive organs 
grow very slowly throughout childhood and develop rapidly 
in adolescence. Notice also that growth of the lymph tis-
sues—which make up part of the immune system and help 
children fight off infections—actually overshoots adult levels 
late in childhood, before declining rapidly in adolescence.

Figure 5.4 Growth curves for different body systems. Each 
curve plots the size of a group of organs or body parts as a 
percentage of their size at age 20 (which is the 100 percent 
level on the vertical scale). The “general” curve describes 
changes in the body’s size as well as the growth of respiratory 
and digestive organs and musculature. The brain and 
head grow more rapidly than the body in general, and the 
reproductive organs are the slowest to reach adult size. (The 
lymph nodes and other parts of the lymphoid system, which 
function as part of the immune system, also grow rapidly 
and actually exceed adult size during late childhood and 
adolescence.) From Growth at Adolescence, 2nd ed., by 
J. M. Tanner, 1962. Oxford, England: Blackwell. Copyright  
© 1962 by Blackwell Scientific Publications, Inc. Reprinted 
by permission of Blackwell Science, Ltd.

Size attained as percentage of total postnatal growth

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200%

2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20

Reproductive

General

Brain and head

Lymphoid

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  173

• 

• 

Individual Variations
Not only is the development of body sys-
tems an uneven or asynchronous process, 
but there are sizable individual variations in 
the rates at which children grow (Kohler & 
Rigby, 2003). Look carefully at Figure 5.5. 
These two boys are the same age, although 
one has already reached puberty and looks 
much older. As we will see later in the chap-
ter, two grade-school friends might begin 
the pubertal transition from child to adult 
as much as 5 years apart!

Figure 5.5 There are large individual variations in the timing of the adolescent 
growth spurt, as we see in comparing the stature of these two boys of the 
same age.

© Ellen Senisi/The Image Works

Cultural Variations
Finally, there are meaningful cultural 
and subcultural variations in physical 
growth and development. In general, 
people from Asia, South America, and 
Africa tend to be smaller than those from 
North America, Northern Europe, and 
Australia. In addition, there are cultural differences in the rate of physical growth. 
Asian American and African American children, for example, tend to mature faster 
than European American and European children (Berkey et al., 1994; Herman- 
Giddens et al., 1997).

What accounts for these variations in growth? Current thinking is that asynchronies 
in the maturation of different body systems are built into our species’ heredity—that is, 
the common maturational program that all humans share (Tanner, 1990). And later in 
the chapter, we will see that heredity, in concert with such environmental factors as the 
food people eat, the diseases they may encounter, and even the emotional climate in 
which they live, can produce significant variations in the rates at which they grow and 
the statures they attain (Kohler & Rigby, 2003).

Development of the Brain

The brain grows at an astounding rate early in life, increasing from 25 percent of its 
eventual adult weight at birth to 75 percent of adult weight by age 2. Indeed, the last 
3 prenatal months and the first 2 years after birth have been termed the period of the 
brain growth spurt because more than half of one’s adult brain weight is gained at 
this time (Glaser, 2000). Between the 7th prenatal month and a child’s 1st birthday, 
the brain increases in weight by about 1.7 grams a day, or more than a milligram per 
minute.

brain growth spurt
the period between the 7th 
 prenatal month and 2 years of age 
when more than half of the child’s 
eventual brain weight is gained.

However, an increase in brain weight is a general index that tells us very little 
about how or when various parts of the brain mature and affect other aspects of 
development. Let’s take a closer look at the internal organization and development 
of the brain.

Neural Development and Plasticity

The human brain and nervous system consist of more than a trillion highly specialized 
cells that work together to transmit electrical and chemical signals across many tril-
lions of synapses, or connective spaces between the cells. Neurons are the basic unit 
of the brain and nervous system—the cells that receive and transmit neural impulses. 

synapse
the connective space (juncture) 
between one nerve cell (neuron) 
and another.

neurons
nerve cells that receive and trans-
mit neural impulses.

174  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

Neurons are produced in the neural tube of the developing embryo. From there, they 
migrate along pathways laid down by a network of guiding cells to form the major 
parts of the brain. The vast majority of the neurons a person will ever have—some 
100 to 200 billion of them—have already formed by the end of the second trimester 
of pregnancy, before the brain growth spurt has even begun (Kolb & Fantie, 1989; 
Rakic, 1991). Until recently, it was thought that no new neurons were produced after 
a baby was born. However, scientists have established that formation of new neurons 
in the hippocampus (an area of the brain important to learning and memory) occurs 
throughout life (Kemperman & Gage, 1999).

What, then, accounts for the brain growth spurt? One major contributor is the 
development of a second type of nerve cell, called glia, which nourish the neurons and 
eventually encase them in insulating sheaths of a waxy substance called myelin. Glia 
are far more numerous than neurons are, and they continue to form throughout life 
(Tanner, 1990).

glia
nerve cells that nourish neurons 
and encase them in insulating 
sheaths of myelin.

Neural Development: Cell Differentiation and Synaptogenesis
Influenced by the sites to which they migrate, neurons assume specialized 
 functions—as cells of the visual or auditory areas of the brain, for example. If a 
neuron that would normally migrate to the visual area of the brain is instead trans-
planted to the area that controls hearing, it will change to become an auditory 
neuron  instead of a visual neuron (Johnson, 1998, 2005). So individual neurons have 
the potential to serve any neural function, and the function each serves depends on 
where it ends up.

Meanwhile, the process of synaptogenesis—the formation of synaptic connec-
tions among neurons—proceeds rapidly during the brain growth spurt. This brings 
us to an intriguing fact about the developing nervous system: the average infant has 
far more neurons and neural connections than adults do (Elkind, 2001). The reason is 
that neurons that successfully interconnect with other neurons crowd out those that 
don’t, so that about half the neurons produced early in life also die early (Elkind, 2001; 
Janowsky & Finlay, 1986). Meanwhile, surviving neurons form hundreds of synapses, 
many of which will disappear if the neuron is not properly stimulated (Huttenlocher, 
1994). If we likened the developing brain to a house under construction, we might 
imagine a builder who merrily constructs many more rooms and hallways than he or 
she needs and later goes back and knocks about half of them out!

synaptogenesis
formation of connections (syn-
apses) among neurons.

What is happening here reflects the remarkable plasticity of the young infant’s 
brain—the fact that its cells are highly responsive to the effects of experience (Stiles, 
2000). As William Greenough and his colleagues (1987) explain, the brain has evolved 
so that it produces an excess of neurons and synapses in preparation for receiving any 
and all kinds of sensory and motor stimulation that a human being could conceiv-
ably experience. Of course, no human being has this broad a range of experiences, so 
much of one’s neural circuitry remains unused. Presumably, then, neurons and syn-
apses that are most often stimulated continue to function. Other surviving neurons 
that are stimulated less often lose their synapses (a process called synaptic pruning) and 
stand in reserve to compensate for brain injuries or to support new skills (Elkind, 2001; 
 Huttenlocher, 1994). Note the implication: the development of the brain early in life is 
not due entirely to the unfolding of a maturational program, but is instead the result of 
both a biological program and early experience (Greenough, Black, & Wallace, 1987; 
Johnson, 1998, 2005).

plasticity
capacity for change; a develop-
mental state that has the poten-
tial to be shaped by experience.

Neural Plasticity: The Role of Experience
How do we know that early experience plays such a dramatic role in the develop-
ment of the brain and central nervous system? The first clue came from research by 

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  175

Austin Riesen and his colleagues (Riesen, 1947; Riesen et al., 1951). Riesen’s subjects 
were infant chimpanzees that were reared in the dark for periods ranging up to 16 
months. His results were striking. Dark-reared chimps experienced atrophy of the 
retina and the neurons that make up the optic nerve. This atrophy was reversible 
if the animal’s visual deprivation did not exceed 7 months, but it was irreversible 
and often led to total blindness if the deprivation lasted longer than a year. So neu-
rons that are not properly stimulated will degenerate (Elkind, 2001; Rapoport et al., 
2001).

Might we then foster the neural development of an immature, malleable brain by 
exposing participants to enriched environments that provide a wide variety of stimula-
tion? Absolutely. Animals raised with lots of companions and many toys to play with 
have brains that are heavier and display more extensive networks of neural connections 
than those of litter-mates raised under standard laboratory conditions (Greenough & 
Black, 1992; Rosenzweig, 1984). What’s more, the brains of animals raised in stimulat-
ing environments lose some of their complexity if the animals are moved to less stimu-
lating quarters (Thompson, 1993).

In one human study, head circumference, a rough indicator of brain size, was as-
sessed in 221 children at a gestational age of 18 weeks, again at birth, and finally at 
9 years of age. The head circumferences of children from high-socioeconomic-status 
(SES) homes, and those whose mothers had earned college degrees, were significantly 
larger than the head circumferences of children from low-SES homes and whose moth-
ers had no degrees (Gale et al., 2004). So, even though genes may provide rough guide-
lines as to how the brain should be configured, early experience largely determines the 
brain’s specific architecture (Rapoport et al., 2001).

Brain Differentiation and Growth

Not all parts of the brain develop at the same rate. At birth, the most highly developed 
areas are the lower (subcortical) brain centers, which control states of consciousness, 
inborn reflexes, and vital biological functions such as digestion, respiration, and elimi-
nation. Surrounding these structures are the cerebrum and cerebral cortex, the areas 
most directly implicated in voluntary bodily movements, perception, and higher in-
tellectual activities such as learning, thinking, and language. The first areas of the 
cerebrum to mature are the primary motor areas (which control simple motor activi-
ties such as waving the arms) and the primary sensory areas (which control sensory 
processes such as vision, hearing, smelling, and tasting). Thus, one reason human 
neonates are reflexive, “sensory-motor” beings is that only the sensory and motor 
areas of the cortex are functioning well at birth. By 6 months of age, the primary 
motor areas of the cerebral cortex have developed to the point that they now direct 
most of the infant’s movements. Inborn responses such as the palmar grasp and the 
Babinski reflex should have disappeared by now, thus indicating that the higher corti-
cal centers are assuming proper control over the more primitive subcortical areas of 
the brain.

Myelinization
As brain cells proliferate and grow, some of the glia begin to produce a waxy substance 
called myelin, which forms a sheath around individual neurons. This myelin sheath acts 
as an insulator to speed up the transmission of neural impulses, allowing the brain to 
communicate more efficiently with different parts of the body.

Myelinization follows a definite chronological sequence that is consistent with 
the maturation of the rest of the nervous system. At birth or shortly thereafter, the 
pathways between the sense organs and the brain are reasonably well myelinated. 

myelinization
the process by which neurons are 
enclosed in waxy myelin sheaths 
that will facilitate the transmis-
sion of neural impulses.

176  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

• 

• 

As a result, the neonate’s sensory equipment is in good working order. As neural 
pathways between the brain and the skeletal muscles myelinate (in a cephalocaudal 
and proximodistal pattern), the child becomes capable of increasingly complex motor 
activities such as lifting its head and chest, reaching with its arms and hands, rolling 
over, sitting, standing, and eventually walking and running. Although myelinization 
proceeds very rapidly over the first few years of life (Herschkowitz, 2000), some areas 
of the brain are not completely myelinated until the mid- to late teens or early adult-
hood (Fischer & Rose, 1995; Kennedy et al., 2002; Rapoport et al., 2001; Sowell et al., 
1999). For example, the reticular formation and the frontal cortex—parts of the brain 
that allow us to concentrate on a subject for lengthy periods—are not fully myelin-
ated at puberty  (Tanner, 1990). This may be one reason that the attention spans of 
infants, toddlers, and school-age children are much shorter than those of adolescents 
and adults.

In addition, as myelinization enhances the efficiency between the more primitive, 
emotive subcortical areas of the brain and the more regulatory prefrontal cortical areas 
of the brain, an infant or child’s ability to process and respond to socially important 
emotional input—such as the expressions of fear or disapproval on a parent’s face—
may improve. As well, a child’s ability to monitor his or her own emotional reactions 
increases (Herba & Phillips, 2004). For example, in a rush to grab the next present, 
a 3- or 4-year-old may quickly discard a disappointing birthday gift, such as clothing, 
whereas a 6-year-old may pause and give a polite “thank you” to Grandma, thus man-
aging to mask disappointment and delay the gratification of exploring the next, more 
desirable gift. A teenager may display an even more complex inhibition pattern— 
smiling politely when a gift of unfashionable clothing is received from Grandma, and 
scowling and protesting when a similar fashion faux pas is passed along from Mom 
(who should know better).

Cerebral Lateralization
The highest brain center, the cerebrum,  consists of two halves (or hemispheres) con-
nected by a band of fibers called the corpus callosum.  Each of the hemispheres is 
covered by a cerebral cortex—an outer layer of gray matter that controls sensory 
and motor processes, perception, and intellectual functioning. Although identical 
in appearance, the left and right cerebral hemispheres serve different functions and 
control different areas of the body. The left cerebral hemisphere controls the right 
side of the body; and, as illustrated in 
Figure 5.6, it contains centers for speech, 

cerebrum
the highest brain center; includes 
both hemispheres of the brain 
and the fibers that connect them.

corpus callosum
the bundle of neural fibers that 
connects the two hemispheres of 
the brain and transmits informa-
tion from one hemisphere to the 
other.

cerebral cortex
the outer layer of the brain’s cere-
brum that is involved in voluntary 
body movements, perception, 
and higher intellectual functions 
such as learning, thinking, and 
speaking.

Figure 5.6 Lateral view of the 
left cerebral cortex and some of 
the functions that it controls. 
Although the cerebellum and 
spinal cord are not part of the 
cerebral cortex, they serve 
important functions of their own.

Parietal lobe
(perception)
Sensory cortex
(body sensations)
Motor cortex
(body movements)
Frontal lobe
(decision making)

 Occipital lobe
(vision)

Auditory cortex
(hearing)

Wernicke’s area
(understanding of
spoken language)

Spinal cord
(transmission of neural
impulses to and from the brain)
Temporal lobe
(verbal memory)

Cerebellum
(equilibrium,
coordination)
Broca’s area
(speech
production)

© Cengage Learning. 

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  177

hearing, verbal memory, decision making, language processing, and expression of 
positive emotions. The right cerebral hemisphere, on the other hand, controls the 
left side of the body and contains centers for processing visual-spatial information, 
nonlinguistic sounds such as music, tactile (touch) sensations, and expressing neg-
ative emotions (Fox et al., 1995). Thus, the brain is a lateralized organ. Cerebral 
 lateralization also involves a preference for using one hand or one side of the body 
more than the other. About 90 percent of adults rely on their right hands (or left 
hemispheres) to write, eat, and perform other motor functions, whereas these same 
activities are under the control of the right hemisphere among most people who are 
left-handed. However, the fact that the brain is a lateralized organ does not mean 
that each hemisphere is totally independent of the other; the corpus callosum, which 
connects the hemispheres, plays an important role in integrating their respective 
functions.

cerebral lateralization
the specialization of brain func-
tions in the left and the right 
cerebral hemispheres.

When do the two cerebral hemispheres begin to become lateralized? Brain lat-
eralization may originate during the prenatal period and be well under way at birth 
(Kinsbourne, 1989). For example, about two-thirds of all fetuses end up positioned 
in the womb with their right ears facing outward, and it is thought that this gives 
them a right ear advantage and illustrates the left hemisphere’s specialization in 
language processing (Previc, 1991). From the first day of life, speech sounds stimu-
late more electrical activity in the left side of the cerebral cortex than in the right 
(Molfese, 1977). In addition, most newborns turn to the right rather than to the 
left when they lie on their backs, and these same babies later tend to reach for 
 objects with their right hands (Kinsbourne, 1989). So it seems that the two cerebral 
hemispheres may be biologically programmed to assume different functions and 
have already begun to differentiate by the time a baby is born (Kinsbourne, 1989; 
Witelson, 1987).

However, the brain is not completely specialized at birth; throughout child-
hood we come to rely more and more on one particular hemisphere or the other 
to serve particular functions. Consider, for example, that even though left- or right-
handedness is apparent early and is reasonably well established by age 2, lateral 
preferences become stronger with age. In one experiment, preschoolers and adoles-
cents were asked to pick up a crayon, kick a ball, look into a small, opaque bottle, 
and place an ear to a box to hear a sound. Only 32 percent of the preschoolers, but 
more than half of the adolescents, showed a consistent lateral preference by rely-
ing exclusively on one side of the body to perform all four tasks (Coren, Porac, & 
Duncan, 1981).

Because the immature brain is not completely specialized, young children often 
show a remarkable ability to bounce back from traumatic brain injuries as neural cir-
cuits that might otherwise have been lost assume the functions of those that have died 
(Kolb & Fantie, 1989; Rakic, 1991). Although adolescents and adults who suffer brain 
damage often regain a substantial portion of the functions they have lost, especially 
with proper therapy, their recoveries are rarely as rapid or as complete as those of 
younger children (Kolb & Fantie, 1989). So the remarkable recuperative power of the 
human brain (that is, its plasticity) is greatest early in life, before cerebral lateralization 
is complete.

Development of the Brain During Adolescence
Through the ages, adults have noticed that when children reach the teenage years, they 
suddenly begin to ask hypothetical, “what if” questions and to ponder weighty abstrac-
tions such as truth and justice. Are these changes in thinking tied to late developments 
in the brain?

178  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

• 

Many researchers now believe that they are (Case, 1992; Somsen et al., 1997). For 
example, myelinization of the higher brain centers, which continues well into adoles-
cence, not only may increase adolescents’ attention spans but also explains why they 
process information much faster than grade-school children (Kail, 1991; Rapoport et al., 
2001). Furthermore, we now know that the brain retains at least some of its plasticity 
well beyond puberty (Nelson & Bloom, 1997) and that reorganizations of the neural cir-
cuitry of the prefrontal cortex, which is involved in such higher-level cognitive activities as 
strategic planning, continues until at least age 20 (Spreen, Risser, & Edgell, 1995; Stuss, 
1992). In addition, brain volume increases through early to midadolescence and then 
decreases during late adolescence, suggesting that some pubertal reorganizations may 
involve synaptic pruning (Kennedy et al., 2002; Rapoport et al., 2001). So, even though 
changes in the brain during adolescence are less dramatic than those earlier in life, it is 
likely that some of the cognitive advances that teenagers display become possible only 
after their brains undergo a process of reorganization and specialization (Barry et al., 
2002, 2005).

CONCEPT CHECK 5.1
Overview of Physical Development and Brain Development

Check your understanding of general trends in maturation 
and growth and the development of the brain by  answering 
the following questions. Answers to objective questions 
 appear in the Appendix.

Multiple Choice: Select the best alternative for each 
question.

1. The fact that a newborn’s head is 70 percent 
of its adult size and a full half of its body 
length is best explained by which concept of 
development?
 a. The skeletal age trend
 b. The cephalocaudal trend
 c. The proximodistal trend
 d. The fontenelle trend

2. Which of the following body parts actually 
overshoots adult levels in childhood and then 
declines to adult levels later in adolescence?
 a. The head and brain
 b. The muscular system
 c. The lymphoid system
 d. The skeletal system

3. The basic unit of the brain and nervous system 
are the cells that receive and transmit neural 
impulses. These cells are called
 a. glia cells.
 b. neurons.
 c. myelin.
 d. synapses.

4. Scientists believe that the human brain has 
evolved so that the infant brain can be highly 
responsive to the effects of experience. The brain 
is thought to produce an excess of neurons and 
synapses so that it can be responsive to many 
different kinds of sensory and motor stimulation. 
This responsiveness also results in synaptic and 
neural degeneration when the neurons that are 

not stimulated do not continue to function. This 
aspect of brain development is termed
 a. plasticity.
b. myelinization.
c. cerebral cortexification.
d. cerebral lateralization.

5. Gretchen is having a baby. She learned that 
brain lateralization may occur during the prena-
tal period and be well under way at birth. This 
understanding led her to fully expect the posi-
tioning of her fetus when it was examined with 
ultrasound. Like two-thirds of all fetuses, her 
fetus was positioned in her womb
 a. with its left ear facing outward.
 b. with its right ear facing outward.
 c. with its ears facing upward.
 d. with its ears facing downward.

True or False: Indicate whether each of the following 
statements is true or false.

6. (T)(F) At birth, an infant’s bones are very stiff and 
brittle and easy to break.
7. (T)(F) Individual neurons have the potential to serve 
any neural function, depending on where their migra-
tion delivers them.
8. (T)(F) Very few neurons produced early in life die; in-
stead, they are adapted for different functions in the 
nervous system.
9. (T)(F) Although the brain is lateralized at birth, lat-
eral preferences continue to become stronger across 
age through adolescence.

Short Answer: Briefly answer the following question.

10. Explain the ways in which the development of the 
brain and nervous system help us to understand why 
babies are reflexive, “sensory-motor” beings at birth.

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  179

Motor Development

One of the more dramatic developments of the 1st year of life is the remarkable progress 
that infants make in controlling their movements and perfecting motor skills. Writers 
have sometimes described newborns as “helpless babes”—a characterization that largely 
stems from the neonate’s inability to move about on her own. Clearly, human infants 
are disadvantaged when compared with the young of some other species, who can fol-
low their mothers to food (and then feed themselves) very soon after birth.

However, babies do not remain immobile for long. By the end of the 1st month, 
the brain and neck muscles have matured enough to permit most infants to reach the 
first milestone in locomotor development: lifting their chins while lying flat on their 
stomachs. Soon thereafter, children lift their chests as well, reach for objects, roll over, 
and sit up if someone supports them. Investigators who have charted motor develop-
ment over the first 2 years find that motor skills evolve in a definite sequence, which 
appears in Table 5.1. Although the ages at which these skills first appear vary consider-
ably from child to child, infants who are quick to proceed through this motor sequence 
are not necessarily any brighter or otherwise advantaged, compared with those whose 
rates of motor development are average or slightly below average. Thus, even though 
the age norms in Table 5.1 are a useful standard for gauging an infant’s progress as he 
or she begins to sit, stand, and take those first tentative steps, a child’s rate of motor 
development really tells us very little about future developmental outcomes.

Basic Trends in Locomotor Development

The two fundamental “laws” that describe muscular development and myelinization 
also hold true for motor development during the first few years. Motor development 
proceeds in a cephalocaudal (head downward) direction, with activities involving the 

TABLE 5.1  Age Norms (in Months) for Important Motor Developments (Based on 
European American, Latino, and African American Children in the 
United States)

Skill

Month when 50% 
of infants have 
mastered the skill

Month when 90% 
of infants have  
mastered the skill

Lifts head 90° while lying on stomach
2.2
3.2

Rolls over
2.8
4.7

Sits propped up
2.9
4.2

Sits without support
5.5
7.8

Stands holding on
5.8
10.0

Crawls
7.0
9.0

Walks holding on
9.2
12.7

Plays pat-a-cake
9.3
15.0

Stands alone momentarily
9.8
13.0

Stands well alone
11.5
13.9

Walks well
12.1
14.3

Builds tower of two cubes
13.8
19.0

Walks up steps
17.0
22.0

Kicks ball forward
20.0
24.0

Sources: Bayley, 1993; Frankenburg et al., 1992.

180  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

head, neck, and upper extremities preceding those involving the legs and lower ex-
tremities. At the same time, development is proximodistal (center outward), with ac-
tivities involving the trunk and shoulders appearing before those involving the hands 
and fingers. The kicking movements displayed by infants during the first few months 
present a problem for the cephalocaudal perspective and are usually dismissed as 
unintentional movements generated by the central nervous system (Lamb & Yang, 
2000). However, Galloway and Thelen (2004) present evidence that contradicts the 
“cephalocaudal rule.” First they point to evidence demonstrating that infants alter 
the pattern of their leg movements when rewarded. For example, infants change 
from alternating leg kicks to simultaneous kicks (Thelen, 1994), as well as from flexed 
leg movements to extended leg movements (Angulo-Kinzler, 2001; Angulo-Kinzler, 
Ulrich, & Thelen, 2002). They note that even Piaget (1952) noticed that his son re-
peated leg kicks that shook a toy. Finally, Galloway and Thelen (2004) presented six 
infants with toys at both foot and hand level. The infants first made contact with the 
toy at around 12 weeks and did so by lifting a leg to touch the toy. First contact with 
hands was made at around 16 weeks, much later than the intentional foot contact. 
Extended contact with their feet also preceded extended contact with their hands. 
Galloway and Thelen suggest that the structure of the hip joint may contribute to 
infants’ early ability to control their legs because the hip joint is more stable and con-
strained than the shoulder joint. Therefore, the amount of motion to be controlled 
is much smaller for the hip joint than for the shoulder joint. Control of the shoulder 
joint may call for much more experience, practice, and activity to master. Infants thus 
are able to coordinate hip movement earlier than shoulder movement, contradicting 
the cephalocaudal rule of thumb.

How do we explain the sequencing and timing of early motor development? Let’s 
briefly consider three possibilities: the maturational viewpoint, the experiential (or practice) 
hypothesis, and a newer dynamical systems theory that views motor development (and the 
whole of development) as a product of a complex transaction among the child’s physical 
capabilities, goals, and the experiences he has had (Kenrick, 2001; Thelen, 1995).

The Maturational Viewpoint
The maturational viewpoint (Shirley, 1933) describes motor development as the un-
folding of a genetically programmed sequence of events in which the nerves and mus-
cles mature in a downward and outward direction. As a result, children gradually gain 
more control over the lower and peripheral parts of their bodies, displaying motor skills 
in the sequence shown in Table 5.1.

One clue that maturation plays a prominent role in motor development comes from 
cross-cultural research. Despite their very different early experiences, infants from around 
the world progress through roughly the same sequence of motor milestones. In addition, 
early studies in which one identical twin was allowed to practice motor skills (such as 
climbing stairs or stacking blocks) while the co-twin was denied these experiences sug-
gested that practice had little effect on motor development: when finally allowed to per-
form, the unpracticed twin soon matched the skills of the co-twin who had had many 
opportunities to practice (Gesell & Thompson, 1929; McGraw, 1935). Taken together, 
these findings seemed to imply that maturation underlies motor development and that 
practice merely allows a child to perfect those skills that maturation has made possible.

The Experiential (or Practice) Hypothesis
Although no one denies that maturation contributes to motor development, pro-
ponents of the experiential viewpoint believe that opportunities to practice motor 
skills are also important. Consider what Wayne Dennis (1960) found when he stud-
ied two groups of institutionalized orphans in Iran who had spent most of their first 

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  181

Blend Images/Alamy 

2 years lying flat on their backs in their cribs. These in-
fants were never placed in a sitting position, were rarely 
played with, and were even fed in their cribs with their 
bottles propped on pillows. Was their motor develop-
ment affected by these depriving early experiences? In-
deed it was! None of the 1- to 2-year-olds could walk, 
and less than half of them could even sit unaided. In fact, 
only 15 percent of the 3- to 4-year-olds could walk well 
alone! So Dennis concluded that maturation is necessary 
but not sufficient for the development of motor skills. In 
other words, infants who are physically capable of sit-
ting, crawling, or walking will not be very proficient at 
these activities unless they have opportunities to practice 
them.

Not only does a lack of practice inhibit motor de-
velopment but cross-cultural research illustrates that 
a variety of enriching experiences can even accelerate 
the process. Cross-cultural studies tell us that the ages 
at which infants attain major motor milestones are 
heavily influenced by parenting practices. The Kipsigis 
of Kenya, for example, work to promote motor skills. 
By their 8th week, infants are already practicing their 
“walking” as parents grasp them by the armpits and 
propel them forward. Also, throughout their first few 
months, infants are seated in shallow holes, dug so that 
the sides support their backs and maintain an upright 
posture. Given these experiences, it is perhaps not sur-
prising that Kipsigi infants sit unassisted about 5 weeks 
earlier and walk unaided about a month earlier than 
Western infants do.
Similarly, Brian Hopkins (1991) has compared the motor development of white 
infants in England with that of black infants whose families emigrated to England from 
Jamaica. As in several other comparisons between black and white infants, the black 
infants displayed such important motor skills as sitting, crawling, and walking at earlier 
ages. Do these findings reflect genetic differences between blacks and whites? Probably 
not, because black babies were likely to acquire motor skills early only if their mothers 
had followed traditional Jamaican routines for handling infants and nurturing motor 
development. These routines include massaging infants, stretching their limbs, and 
holding them by the arms while gently shaking them up and down. Jamaican mothers 
expect early motor development, work to promote it, and get it.

Dovetailing nicely with the cross-cultural work are experiments conducted by 
Philip Zelazo and his associates (1972, 1993) with North American infants. Zelazo 
found that 2- to 8-week-old babies who were regularly held in an upright posture and 
encouraged to practice their stepping reflex showed a strengthening of this response 
(which usually disappears early in life). They also walked at an earlier age than did in-
fants in a control group who did not receive this training.

Why might having one’s limbs stretched or being held (or sat) in an upright pos-
ture hasten motor development? Esther Thelen’s (1986; Thelen & Fisher, 1982) view 
is that babies who are often placed in an upright position develop strength in the neck, 
trunk, and legs (an acceleration of muscular growth), which, in turn, promotes the 
early development of such motor skills as standing and walking. So it seems that both 
maturation and experience are important contributors to motor development. Matu-
ration does place some limits on the age at which the child will first be capable of 

Toddler aptly describes 1–2 year olds who often lose their 
 balance when trying to walk.

182  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

SW Productions/Stockbyte/Getty Images

sitting, standing, and walking. Yet experiences such as upright posturing and various 
forms of practice may influence the age at which important maturational capabilities 
are achieved and translated into action.

According to dynamical systems 
theory, new motor skills emerge 
as curious infants reorganize 
their existing capabilities in 
order to achieve important 
objectives.

Motor Skills as Dynamic, Goal-Directed Systems
Although they would certainly agree that both maturation and experience con-
tribute to motor development, proponents of an exciting new perspective— 
 dynamical systems theory—differ from earlier theorists. They do not view 
motor skills as genetically programmed responses that simply “unfold” as dictated 
by maturation and opportunities to practice. Instead, they view each new skill as a 
construction that emerges as infants actively reorganize existing motor capabilities 
into new and more complex action systems. At first, these new motor configu-
rations are likely to be tentative, inefficient, and uncoordinated. New walkers, 
for example, spend a fair amount of time on their backsides and are not called 
“toddlers” for nothing. But over a period of time, these new motor patterns are 
modified and refined until all components mesh and become smooth, coordinated 
actions such as bouncing, crawling, walking, running, and jumping (Thelen, 1995; 
Whitall & Getchell, 1995).

dynamical systems theory
a theory that views motor skills 
as active reorganizations of pre-
viously mastered capabilities 
that are undertaken to find more 
effective ways of exploring the 
environment or satisfying other 
objectives.

But why would infants work so hard to acquire new motor skills? Unlike ear-
lier theories that did not address this issue, the dynamical systems theory offers a 
straightforward answer: Infants hope to acquire and perfect new motor skills that 
will help them to get to interesting objects they hope to explore or to accomplish 
other goals they may have in mind (Thelen, 1995). Consider what Eugene Gold-
field (1989) learned in studying infants’ emerging ability to crawl. Goldfield found 
that 7- to 8-month-old infants began to crawl on their hands and knees only after 
they (1) regularly turned and raised their heads toward interesting sights and sounds 
in the environment, (2) had developed a distinct hand/arm preference when reach-
ing for such stimuli, and (3) had begun to thrust (kick) with the leg opposite to the 
outstretched arm. Apparently, visual orientation motivates the infant to approach 
interesting stimuli she can’t reach, reaching steers the body in the right direction, and 
kicking with the opposite leg propels the body forward. So, far from being a prepro-
grammed skill that simply unfolds according to a maturational plan, crawling (and 
virtually all other motor skills) actually represents an active and intricate reorganiza-
tion of several existing capabilities that is undertaken by a curious, active infant who has 
a particular goal in mind.

Why, then, do all infants proceed through the same general sequence of locomo-
tor milestones? Partly because of their human maturational programming, which sets 
the stage for various accomplishments, and partly because each successive motor skill 
must necessarily build on specific component activities that have developed earlier. 
How does experience fit in? According to the dynamical systems theory, a real world 
of interesting objects and events provides infants with many reasons to want to reach 
out or to sit up, crawl, walk, and run—that is, with purposes and motives that might be 
served by actively reorganizing their existing skills into new and more complex action 
systems (Adolph, Vereijken, & Denny, 1998). Of course, no two infants have exactly 
the same set of experiences (or goals), which may help explain why each infant coor-
dinates the component activities of an emerging motor skill in a slightly different way 
(Thelen et al., 1993).

In sum, the development of motor skills is far more interesting and complex than 
earlier theories had assumed. Though maturation plays a very important role, the basic 
motor skills of the first 2 years do not simply unfold as part of nature’s grand plan. 
Rather, they emerge largely because goal-driven infants are constantly recombining ac-
tions they can perform into new and more complex action systems that will help them 
achieve their objectives.

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  183

Bruce Plotkin / The Image Works

Fine Motor Development

Two other aspects of motor development play especially important roles in helping 
infants to explore and adapt to their surroundings: voluntary reaching and manipulatory 
(or hand) skills.

Development of Voluntary Reaching
An infant’s ability to reach out and manipulate objects changes dramatically over the 
1st year. Recall that newborns come equipped with a grasping reflex. They are also 
inclined to reach for things, although these primitive thrusts (or prereaches) are little 
more than uncoordinated swipes at objects in the visual field. Prereaching is truly 
a hit-or-miss proposition (Bower, 1982). By 2 months of age, infants’ reaching and 
grasping skills may even seem to deteriorate: the reflexive palmar grasp disappears 
and prereaching occurs much less often (Bower, 1982). However, these apparent re-
gressions set the stage for the appearance of voluntary reaching. Babies 3 months of 
age and older display this new competency as they extend their arms and make in-
flight corrections, gradually improving in accuracy until they can reliably grasp their 
objectives (Hofsten, 1984; Thelen et al., 1993). However, infants clearly differ in how 
they reach for objects. Some infants will flap their arms at first and must learn to 
dampen their enthusiasm, whereas others start off reaching tentatively and will soon 
learn that they must supply more power to grasp their objectives (Thelen et al., 1993). 
So, here again, we see that reaching is a motor skill that does not simply “unfold”; 
instead, babies reach in different ways and take their own unique pathways to refining 
this important skill.

Development of Manipulatory Skills
Once an infant is able to sit well and to reach inward, across his body, at about 4 to 
5 months, he begins to grasp interesting objects with both hands and his exploratory 
activities forever change. Rather than merely batting or palming objects, he is now apt 
to transfer them from hand to hand or to hold them with one hand and finger them 
with the other (Rochat, 1989; Rochat & Goubet, 1995). Indeed, this fingering activity 
may be the primary method by which 4- to 6-month-olds gain information 
about objects, for their unimanual (one-handed) grasping skills are poorly 
developed: the reflexive palmar grasp has already disappeared by this age, 
and the ulnar grasp that replaces it is itself a rather clumsy, clawlike grip 
that permits little tactile exploration of objects by touch.
ulnar grasp
an early manipulatory skill in 
which an infant grasps objects by 
pressing the fingers against the 
palm.

During the latter half of the 1st year, fingering skills improve 
and infants become much more proficient at tailoring all their ex-
ploratory activities to the properties of the objects they are in-
vestigating (Palmer, 1989). Now, wheeled toys are likely to be 
scooted rather than banged, spongy objects are squeezed rather 
than scooted, and so on. The next major step in the growth of 
hand skills occurs near the end of the 1st year as infants use 
their thumbs and forefingers to lift and explore objects (Hal-
verson, 1931). This pincer grasp transforms the child from a 
little fumbler into a skillful manipulator who may soon begin 
to capture crawling bugs and to turn knobs and dials, thereby 
discovering that he or she can use his newly acquired hand 
skills to produce any number of interesting results.

pincer grasp
a grasp in which the thumb is 
used in opposition to the fingers, 
enabling an infant to become 
more dexterous at lifting and fon-
dling objects.

Throughout the 2nd year, infants become much more pro-
ficient with their hands. At 16 months of age, they can scribble 
with a crayon; and by the end of the 2nd year, they can copy a 

The pincer grasp is a crucial 
motor milestone that under-
lies the development of many 
coordinated manual activities.

184  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

Michelle D. Bridwell / PhotoEdit 

simple horizontal or vertical line and even build towers of five or more blocks. What 
is happening is quite consistent with the dynamical systems theory: infants are gain-
ing control over simple movements and then integrating these skills into increasingly 
complex, coordinated systems (Fentress & McLeod, 1986). Despite this ability, even 
2- to 3-year-olds are not very good at catching and throwing a ball, cutting food with 
utensils, or drawing within the lines of their coloring books. These skills will emerge 
later in childhood as the muscles mature and children become more proficient at 
using visual information to help them coordinate their actions.

Psychological Implications of Early Motor 
Development

Life changes dramatically for both parents and infants once a baby is able to reach out 
and grasp interesting objects, especially after he or she can crawl or walk to explore these 
treasures. Suddenly, parents find they have to child-proof their homes, limit access to 
certain areas, or else run the risk of experiencing a seemingly endless string of disasters 
including torn books, overturned vases, unraveled rolls of toilet paper, and irritated pets 
whose tails the little explorer has pulled. Placing limits on explorations often precipitates 
conflicts and a “testing of the wills” between infants and their parents (Biringen et al., 
1995). Nevertheless, parents are often thrilled by their infant’s emerging motor skills, 
which not only provide clear evidence that development is proceeding normally, but 
also permit such pleasurable forms of social interaction as pat-a-
cake, chase, and hide-and-seek.

Aside from the entertainment value it provides, an infant’s 
increasing control over bodily movements has other important 
cognitive and social consequences.  Mobile infants may feel 
much bolder, for example, about meeting people and seeking 
challenges if they know that they can retreat to their caregiv-
ers for comfort should they feel insecure (Ainsworth, 1979). 
Achieving various motor milestones may also foster percep-
tual development. For example, crawlers (as well as noncrawl-
ers who are made mobile with the aid of special walkers) are 
better able to search for and find hidden objects than infants 
of the same age who are not mobile (Kermoian & Campos, 
1988). The self-produced movement of crawling and walk-
ing also makes infants more aware of optic flow, the perceived 
movement of objects in the visual field as well as the perceived 
movements of the foreground and background in which the 
objects are imbedded. The relative movements of the observer 
or the objects being observed influence such perceptions. For 
example, an infant who is seated in a mechanical swing may 
watch the family dog grow larger and then smaller in a rhyth-
mic manner. However, if the swing winds down and the infant 
is stationary, the synchronized optic flow of the dog ceases. 
Now that the swing has stopped its anxiety-producing move-
ment, the dog may wish to investigate the infant. As the dog 
approaches the stationary infant and swing, the dog appears to 
grow bigger. The pattern of optic flow generated by the dog 
moving toward the infant is quite different from the pattern 
generated by the motion of the infant seated in the activated 
mechanical swing. The infant will experience yet a third pat-
tern of optical flow if, while the parents are preoccupied, big 
brother releases her from the swing and allows her to approach 

As infants swing back and forth they experience changes in 
optical flow, leading to a better understanding of distance 
relationships.

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  185

the dog unsupervised. The dog expands to fill the field completely—unless the dog’s 
previous experience with big brother’s infancy was traumatic. Then the crawling infant 
will perceive the dog as constant in size, as the background and foreground change (the 
dog maintains a safe distance, as it leads the infant all over the house).

So, optic flow and an infant’s gradual understanding of it help the child to orient 
himself in space, improve his posture, and cause him to crawl or walk more efficiently 
(Higgins, Campos, & Kermoian, 1996). Also, crawling and walking both contribute to 
an understanding of distance relationships and a healthy fear of heights (Adolph,  Eppler, 
& Gibson, 1993; Campos, Bertenthal, & Kermoian, 1992). Experienced crawlers and ex-
perienced walkers are better able to use landmarks to find their way than infants who 
have just begun to crawl or to walk—that is, locomotion influences spatial memory 
(Clearfield, 2004). So, once again, we see that human development is a holistic enter-
prise: changes in motor skills have clear implications for other aspects of development.

Beyond Infancy: Motor Development in Childhood 
and Adolescence

The term toddler aptly describes most 1- to 2-year-olds, who often fall down or trip over 
stationary objects when they try to get somewhere in a hurry. But as children mature, 
their locomotor skills increase by leaps and bounds. By age 3, children can walk or run 
in a straight line and leap off the floor with both feet, although they can only clear very 
small (8- to 10-inch) objects in a single bound and cannot easily turn or stop quickly 
while running. Four-year-olds can skip, hop on one foot, catch a large ball with both 
hands, and run much farther and faster than they could 1 year earlier (Corbin, 1973). By 
age 5, children are becoming rather graceful: like adults, they pump their arms when 
they run and their balance has improved to the point that some of them can learn 
to ride a bicycle. Despite (or perhaps because of) the rapid progress they are making, 
young children often overestimate the physical feats they can perform, and the bolder 
or less inhibited ones are likely to be somewhat accident prone, ending up with bruises, 
burns, cuts, scrapes, and an assortment of other injuries (Schwebel & Plumert, 1999).

With each passing year, school-age children can run a little faster, jump a little 
higher, and throw a ball a little farther (Herkowitz, 1978; Keough & Sugden, 1985). 
The reasons that children are improving at these large-muscle activities is that they are 
growing larger and stronger, and are also fine-tuning their motor skills. Young children 
throw only with the arm, whereas adolescents are usually able to coordinate shoulder, 
arm, and leg movements to put the force of their bodies behind their throws. So, older 
children and adolescents can throw farther than younger children can, not solely be-
cause they are bigger and stronger, but because they also use more refined and efficient 
techniques of movement (Gallahue, 1989).

At the same time, eye–hand coordination and control of the small muscles are 
improving rapidly, so children can make more sophisticated use of their hands. 
Three-year-olds find it difficult to button their shirts, tie their shoes, or copy simple 
designs. By age 5, children can accomplish all of these feats and can even cut a straight 
line with scissors or copy letters and numbers with a crayon. By age 8 or 9, they 
can use household tools such as screwdrivers and have become skilled performers at 
games such as jacks and Nintendo that require hand–eye coordination. Finally, older 
children display quicker reaction times than younger children (Williams et al., 1999), 
which helps explain why they usually beat younger playmates at “action” games such 
as dodgeball or Ping-Pong.

Boys and girls are nearly equal in physical abilities until puberty, when boys continue 
to improve on tests of large-muscle activities, whereas girls’ skills level off or decline 
(Thomas & French, 1985). These sex differences are, in part, attributable to biology: ado-
lescent boys have more muscle and less fat than adolescent girls and might be expected 

186  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

Smiley N. Pool/Dallas Morning News/Corbis

to outperform them on tests of physical strength (Tanner, 1990). Yet biological develop-
ments do not account for all the difference in large-muscle performance between boys 
and girls (Smoll & Schutz, 1990), nor do they adequately explain the declining perfor-
mance of many girls, who continue to grow taller and heavier between ages 12 and 17. 
The apparent physical decline of adolescent girls may be a product of gender-role social-
ization: with their widening hips and developing breasts, girls are often encouraged to 
become less tomboyish and more interested in traditionally feminine (and less athletic) 
activities (Blakemore, Berenbaum, & Liben, 2008; Herkowitz, 1978).

There is clearly an element of truth to this notion in that female athletes show no 
apparent decline in large-muscle performance over time. Furthermore, as gender roles 
have changed in the past few decades, female athletes have been steadily improving 
their performances, and the male/female gap in physical performance has narrowed 
dramatically (Dyer, 1977; Whipp & Ward, 1992). So it seems that adolescent girls 
would almost certainly continue to improve on tests of large-muscle activity should 

FOCUS ON RESEARCH
Sports Participation and Self-Esteem Among Adolescent Females

Recently, 
developmentalists 
have begun to consider the 
benefits of physically active 
play,  speculating that it serves 
as a mechanism for building 
muscle strength and endurance 
and possibly for reducing levels 
of fat in children’s growing bod-
ies (Pellegrini & Smith, 1998). 
Physically active play typically 
peaks in early to middle child-
hood and declines thereafter. 
This reduction in vigorous phys-
ical activity is much more appar-
ent for girls than for boys, which undoubtedly helps explain the 
decline in large-muscle strength often seen among girls during 
the adolescent years.

physically active play
moderate to vigorous play activi-
ties such as running, jumping, 
climbing, play fighting, or game 
playing that raise a child’s meta-
bolic rate far above resting levels.

Interestingly, over the past 40 years, our society has be-
come much more supportive of one kind of physical activity for 
girls—participation in competitive and noncompetitive sports. 
Title IX, a federal law passed in 1972 that bans discrimination 
on the basis of gender in federally funded institutions, has 
resulted in dramatic increases in funding for female athletic 
programs at the college level. High school programs for female 
athletes have expanded greatly over the same period, and even 
private corporations such as Nike have entered the playing 
field with an ad campaign featuring young girls pleading, “If 
you let me play sports . . . ,” and then citing various health and 
social benefits that can result from sports participation. One of 
the benefits to which the ads allude is an enhanced sense of 
self-worth (or self-esteem) among female athletes.

Is there any basis for the latter claim? To find out, Erin 
Richman and David Shaffer (2000) constructed an elaborate 
questionnaire to measure both the depth and breadth of female 
freshman college students’ participation in formal and infor-
mal sporting activities during their high school years. These re-
searchers also asked their participants to complete instruments 
designed to assess their current (1) levels of self-esteem, (2) 

feelings of physical compe-
tence, (3) body images, and 
(4) possession of such desir-
able “masculine” attributes 
as assertiveness and a healthy 
sense of competition.

The results provided some 
support for the claims made 
in the Nike ad campaign. 
First, there was a clear rela-
tion between girls’ partici-
pation in sports during high 
school and their later self-
esteem: girls who had earlier 
participated to a greater extent in sports enjoyed higher levels 
of general self-worth as college students. Further analysis re-
vealed that the apparently beneficial effect of earlier sporting 
activities on girls’ college self-esteem reflected the findings 
that (1) sports participation was associated with increases in 
perceived physical competencies, development of a more fa-
vorable body image, and acquisition of desirable masculine 
attributes (such as assertiveness); and (2) all these develop-
ments, in turn, were positively correlated with (and apparently 
fostered) participants’ college self-esteem.

In sum, it appears that girls’ participation in sporting ac-
tivities during the adolescent years may well contribute to an 
enhanced sense of self-worth—but this was true only to the 
extent that sporting activities fostered physical competencies, 
more favorable body images, and such desirable personal at-
tributes as assertiveness (see also Ackerman, 2002; Lehman & 
Joerner, 2005; Malcom, 2003; Shakib, 2003). These findings 
imply that gym classes and formal team sports might be more 
beneficial to a larger number of girls if educators and coaches 
were to emphasize and devise ways to measure and illustrate 
the physical gains and psychological benefits of formal and in-
formal sporting activities, while concentrating less on the out-
comes of competitive sports and/or the physical deficiencies of 
the less athletically competent girls under their tutelage.

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  187

they choose to remain physically active. And as we see in the Focus on Research fea-
ture, they may experience important psychological benefits as well by remaining physi-
cally active throughout the teenage years.

Puberty: The Physical Transition from Child to Adult

The onset of adolescence is heralded by two significant changes in physical develop-
ment. First, children change dramatically in size and shape as they enter the adolescent 
growth spurt (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Second, they also reach puberty (from the Latin 
word pubertas, meaning “to grow hairy”), the point in life when an individual reaches 
sexual maturity (Mustanski et al., 2004) and becomes capable of producing a child 
(Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005).

adolescent growth spurt
the rapid increase in physical 
growth that marks the beginning 
of adolescence.

puberty
the point at which a person 
reaches sexual maturity and is 
physically capable of fathering or 
conceiving a child.
The Adolescent Growth Spurt

The term growth spurt describes the rapid acceleration in height and weight that marks 
the beginning of adolescence (a growth rate that is faster than any growth rate since 
the children were infants) (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Girls typically enter the growth spurt 
by age 10.5, reach a peak growth rate by age 12 (about 1.3 years before menarche), 
and return to a slower rate of growth by age 13 to 13.5 (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005; Tanner, 
1990). Most girls gain only about 2.5 centimeters in height after menarche (Grumbach 
& Styne, 2003). Boys lag behind girls by 2 to 3 years: they typically begin their growth 
spurt by age 13, peak at age 14 (midpuberty), and return to a more gradual rate of 
growth by age 16. Because girls mature much earlier than boys, it is not at all uncom-
mon for females to be the tallest two or three students in a middle school classroom. 
By the end of the growth spurt, boys have increased 28 to 31 centimeters in height and 
girls 27.5 to 29 centimeters (Abbassi, 1998).

In addition to growing taller and heavier, the body assumes an adultlike appear-
ance during the adolescent growth spurt. Perhaps the most noticeable changes are the 
appearance of breasts and a widening of the hips for girls, and a broadening of the 
shoulders for boys. Facial features also assume adult proportions as the forehead pro-
trudes, the nose and jaw become more prominent, and the lips enlarge.

Sexual Maturation

Maturation of the reproductive system occurs at roughly the same time as the adoles-
cent growth spurt and follows a predictable sequence for girls and boys.

Sexual Development in Girls
For most girls, sexual maturation begins at about age 9 to 11 as fatty tissue accumu-
lates around their nipples, forming small “breast buds” (Herman-Giddens et al., 1997; 
Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Full breast development, which takes about 3 to 4 years, finishes 
around age 14 (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Usually pubic hair begins to appear a little later, 
although as many as one-third of all girls develop some pubic hair before their breasts 
begin to develop (Tanner, 1990).

As a girl enters her growth spurt, the breasts grow rapidly and the sex organs 
begin to mature. Internally, the vagina becomes larger, and the walls of the uterus 
develop a powerful set of muscles that may one day be used to accommodate a fetus 
during pregnancy and to push it through the cervix and vagina during the birth pro-
cess. Externally, the mons pubis (the soft tissue covering the pubic bone), the labia (the 
fleshy lips surrounding the vaginal opening), and the clitoris all increase in size and 
become more sensitive to touch (Tanner, 1990).

188  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

At about age 12, the average girl in Western societies reaches menarche—the time 
of her first menstruation (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Though it is generally assumed that a 
girl becomes fertile at menarche, young girls often menstruate without ovulating and 
may remain unable to reproduce for 12 to 18 months after menarche (Pinyerd & Zipf, 
2005; Tanner, 1978). Anovulatory menstrual cycles (menstruation without ovulation) 
are often associated with irregular and painful periods. After 1 to 2 years, cycles become 
ovulatory, more regular, and less painful (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). In the year following 
menarche, female sexual development concludes as the breasts complete their develop-
ment and axillary (underarm) hair appears (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Hair also appears on 
the arms, legs, and, to a lesser degree, on the face (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005).

menarche
the first occurrence of 
menstruation.

Sexual Development in Boys
For boys, sexual maturation begins at about 10 to 13 (9.5 to 13.5) with an enlargement 
of the testes (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). The growth of the testes is often accompanied or 
soon followed by the appearance of unpigmented pubic hair (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). 
As the testes grow, the scrotum also grows; it thins and darkens, and descends to its 
pendulous adult position (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Meanwhile, the penis lengthens and 
widens. At about age 13 to 14.5, sperm production begins (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). By 
the time the penis is fully developed at age 14.5 to 15, most boys will have reached pu-
berty and are now capable of fathering a child (Tanner, 1990).

Somewhat later, boys begin to sprout facial hair, first at the corners of the upper lip, 
then on the sides of the face, and finally on the chin and jawline (Mustanski et al., 2004; 
Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Body hair also grows on the arms and legs, although signs of a 
hairy chest may not appear until the late teens or early 20s, if at all. Another hallmark of 
male sexual maturity is a lowering of the voice as the larynx grows and the vocal cords 
lengthen. In fact, many men may laugh (years later) about hearing their voices “crack-
ing” up and down between a squeaky soprano and a deep baritone, sometimes within 
a single sentence.

Individual Differences in Physical and Sexual Maturation
So far, we have been describing developmental norms, or the average ages when 
 adolescent changes take place. There are many individual differences in the timing of 
physical and sexual maturation. An early-maturing girl who develops breast buds at 
age 8, starts her growth spurt at age 9.5, and reaches menarche at age 10.5 may nearly 
complete her growth and pubertal development before the late-developing girls in her 
class have even begun. Individual differences among boys are at least as great: some 
boys reach sexual maturity by age 12.5 and are as tall as they will ever be by age 13, 
whereas others begin growing later and do not reach puberty until their late teens. This 
perfectly normal biological variation may be observed in any middle school classroom, 
where one will find a wide assortment of bodies, ranging from those that are very child-
like to those that are quite adultlike.

In early adolescence, girls are 
maturing more rapidly than boys.

Secular Trends—Are We Maturing Earlier?
About 25 years ago, women in one family were surprised when a sixth-grader began to 
menstruate shortly after her 12th birthday. The inevitable comparisons soon began, as 
the girl learned that neither of her great-grandmothers had reached this milestone until 
age 15 and that her grandmother had been nearly 14 and her mother 13. At this point, 
the girl casually replied, “Big deal! Lots of girls in my class have got their periods.”

As it turns out, this young woman was simply telling it like it is. In 1900, when 
her great-grandmother was born, the average age of first menstruation was 14 to 15. 
By 1950, most girls were reaching menarche between 13½ and 14, and recent norms 
have dropped even further, to age 12.5 (Tanner, 1990). Today, the definition of “early” 

George Doyle & Ciaran Griffin/Photos.com

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  189

• 

puberty remains puberty begun before 8 years of age for girls and 9 years of age for 
boys (Saenger, 2003). This secular trend toward earlier maturation started more than 
100 years ago in the industrialized nations of the world, where it has now leveled off, 
and it has begun happening in the more prosperous nonindustrialized countries as well 
(Coleman & Coleman, 2002). In addition, people in industrialized nations have been 
growing taller and heavier over the past century. What explains these secular trends? 
Better nutrition and advances in medical care seem to be most responsible (Tanner, 
1990). Today’s children are more likely than their parents or grandparents to reach 
their genetic potentials for maturation and growth because they are better fed and less 
likely to experience growth-retarding illnesses. Even within our own relatively affluent 
society, poorly nourished adolescents mature later than well-nourished ones. Girls who 

secular trend 
a trend in industrialized societ-
ies toward earlier maturation and 
greater body size now than in the 
past.

CONCEPT CHECK 5.2
Motor Development and Puberty

Check your understanding of motor development and de-
velopmental changes associated with puberty by  answering 
the following questions. Answers to objective questions 
 appear in the Appendix.

True or False: Indicate whether each of the following 
statements is true or false.

1. (T)(F) Infants who proceed through stages of motor 
development more quickly than the average are likely 
to be more intelligent later in childhood than infants 
who are average or  behind average.
2. (T)(F) Infants who are mobile (can crawl or walk eas-
ily) are less fearful about meeting strangers because 
they know they can easily escape to their caregiv-
ers if they should begin to feel  insecure in the new 
situation.
3. (T)(F) Generally, girls reach sexual maturity  earlier 
than boys.
4. (T)(F) Girls become capable of having children as 
soon as they have their first menstruation.
5. (T)(F) The secular trend refers to the fact that chil-
dren today are reaching sexual maturity at later ages 
than their grandparents and great-grandparents.

Multiple Choice: Select the best alternative for each 
question.

6. Zach has a young son, about 6 months old. 
Zach believes that helping his son practice 
motor skills will help his son achieve motor 
skills alone earlier than if he did not help his 
son practice. Consequently, when Zach plays 
with his son he helps his son practice sitting 
and walking and encourages his son’s efforts. 
Zach’s viewpoints about motor development are 
most closely aligned with which scientific view 
of motor development?

a. The maturational viewpoint
b. The experiential viewpoint

c. The developmental sequence viewpoint
d. The dynamical systems viewpoint

7. In a study of orphaned children who were con-
fined to their cribs during their first 2 years of 
life, Dennis found that

a. maturation determined the age at which 
young toddlers could sit, crawl, and walk, 
regardless of their experiences.
b. experience determined the age at which 
young toddlers could sit, crawl, and walk, 
regardless of their maturational age.
c. maturation was necessary but not sufficient 
for the development of such motor skills as 
sitting, walking, and crawling.
d. experience was the determining factor, 
regardless of age, of when young toddlers 
could sit, crawl, and walk.

8. Boys and girls are nearly equal in physical abili-
ties until puberty, when

a. girls continue to improve on tests of large-
muscle activities, whereas boys’ skills level 
off or decline.
b. boys continue to improve on tests of large-
muscle activities, whereas girls’ skills level 
off or decline.
c. boys and girls continue to improve on tests 
of large-muscle activities.
d. boys’ and girls’ skills level off or decline.

9. Which of the following is not one of the changes 
associated with the adolescent growth spurt?

a. Girls and boys grow taller and heavier.
b. Girls and boys assume adult facial features 
as their foreheads protrude, and their noses 
and jaws become more prominent.
c. Girls and boys experience a widening of their 
hips.
d. Girls develop breasts and boys experience a 
broadening of their shoulders.

Short Answer: Briefly answer the following question.

10.  Explain the ways in which participation in sports may 
improve the self-esteem of young girls.

190  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

are tall and overweight as children tend to mature early (Graber et al., 1994), whereas 
many dancers, gymnasts, and other girls who engage regularly in strenuous physical 
activity may begin menstruating very late or stop menstruating after they have begun 
(Hopwood et al., 1990). Here, then, are strong clues that nature and nurture interact to 
influence the timing of pubertal events.

Causes and Correlates of Physical Development

Although we have now charted the course of physical development from birth through 
adolescence, we’ve touched only briefly on the factors that influence growth. What 
really causes children to grow in the first place? And why do their bodies change so dra-
matically at adolescence, when growth accelerates? As we will see in the pages that fol-
low, physical development results from a complex and continuous interplay between 
the forces of nature and nurture.

Biological Mechanisms

Clearly, biological factors play a major role in the growth process. Although children 
do not all grow at the same rate, we have seen that the sequencing of both physical 
maturation and motor development is reasonably consistent from child to child. Appar-
ently, these regular maturational sequences that all humans share are species-specific 
attributes—products of our common genetic heritage.

Effects of Individual Genotypes
Aside from our common genetic ties to the human race, we have each inherited a 
unique combination of genes that influence our physical growth and development. 
For example, family studies clearly indicate that height is a heritable attribute: identical 
twins are much more similar in height than fraternal twins, whether the measurements 
are taken during the 1st year of life, at 4 years of age, or in early adulthood (Tanner, 
1990). Rate of maturation is also genetically influenced (Kaprio et al., 1995; Mustanski 
et al., 2004). Similar genetic influences hold for milestones in skeletal growth and even 
for the appearance of teeth in infants.

How does genotype influence growth? We are not completely certain, although it 
appears that our genes regulate the production of hormones, which have major effects 
on physical growth and development.

Hormonal Influences: The Endocrinology of Growth
Hormones begin to influence development long before a child is born. As we learned 
in Chapter 3, a male fetus assumes a malelike appearance because (1) a gene on his Y 
chromosome triggers the development of testes, which (2) secrete a male hormone 
(testosterone) that is necessary for the development of a male reproductive system.

The most critical of the endocrine (hormone-secreting) glands is the pituitary, a 
“master gland” located at the base of the brain that triggers the release of hormones 
from all other endocrine glands. In addition to regulating the endocrine system, the 
pituitary produces a growth hormone (GH)  that stimulates the rapid growth and de-
velopment of body cells. Growth hormone is released in small amounts several times 
a day. And GH is essential for normal growth and development as well. What, then, 
triggers the adolescent growth spurt and other pubertal changes?

pituitary
a “master gland” located at the 
base of the brain that regulates 
the endocrine glands and pro-
duces growth hormone.

growth hormone (GH)
the pituitary hormone that stimu-
lates the rapid growth and devel-
opment of body cells; primarily 
responsible for the adolescent 
growth spurt.

Research (reviewed in Tanner, 1990) has clarified the endocrinology of adoles-
cence far beyond what we knew only 20 to 25 years ago. Long before any noticeable 
physical changes occur, pituitary secretions stimulate a girl’s ovaries to produce more 

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  191

• 

• 

estrogen and a boy’s testes to produce more testosterone.  Once these sex hormones 
reach a critical level, the hypothalamus (a part of the brain) instructs the pituitary to 
 secrete more GH. This increase in GH seems to be wholly responsible for the adoles-
cent growth spurt in girls and is primarily responsible for boys’ growth spurt. As for 
sexual maturation, the female hormone estrogen triggers the growth of a girl’s breasts, 
uterus, vagina, pubic and underarm hair, and the widening of her hips. In boys, testos-
terone is responsible for growth of the penis and prostate, voice changes, and the devel-
opment of facial and body hair. And although GH may be the primary contributor to 
the male growth spurt, testosterone exerts its own independent effects on the growth 
of a boy’s muscles, the broadening of his shoulders, and the extension of his backbone. 
So it seems that adolescent boys experience larger growth spurts than adolescent girls 
simply because testosterone promotes muscular and bone growth in ways that estro-
gen does not. Finally, androgen secreted by adrenal glands plays a secondary role in 
promoting the maturation of muscles and bones in both sexes (Tanner, 1990).

estrogen
female sex hormone, produced by 
the ovaries, that is responsible for 
female sexual maturation.

testosterone
male sex hormone, produced by 
the testes, that is responsible for 
male sexual maturation.

What causes the pituitary to activate the endocrine glands and precipitate the 
 dramatic physical changes of adolescence? No one can say for sure. So, we have 
learned a great deal about how hormones affect human growth and development (see 
Figure 5.7 for a brief review). However, the events responsible for the timing and 
regulation of these hormonal influences remain unclear.

Figure 5.7 Hormonal influences on physical development.

Hypothalamus

Pituitary Gland

Thyroid

Thyroxine

Early brain growth
Bone growth

Adrenal glands

Androgens

Muscular growth
Bone growth

Growth hormone

General growth of
  body tissues
Adolescent growth
  spurt

Testes

Testosterone

Directs direction of male
  reproductive organs 
  before birth
Maturation of male
  reproductive organs
Voice changes
Facial and body hair
Secondary influence on 
  muscular development,
  bone growth, and
  broadening of shoulders

Ovaries

Estrogen

Maturation of female
  reproductive organs
Breast growth
Broadening of hips
Body hair

© Cengage Learning

Environmental Influences

Three kinds of environmental influence can have a major effect on physical growth and 
development: nutrition, illnesses, and the quality of care that children receive.

Nutrition
Diet is perhaps the most important environmental influence on human growth and 
development. As you might expect, children who are inadequately nourished grow 
very slowly, if at all.

Hypothalamus

Pituitary Gland

Thyroid
Adrenal glands
Testes
Ovaries

Thyroxine
Androgens
Testosterone
Estrogen
Growth hormone

Early brain growth
Bone growth
Muscular growth
Bone growth
General growth of
  body tissues
Adolescent growth
  spurt

Directs direction of male
  reproductive organs 
  before birth
Maturation of male
  reproductive organs
Voice changes
Facial and body hair
Secondary influence on 
  muscular development,
  bone growth, and
  broadening of shoulders

Maturation of female
  reproductive organs
Breast growth
Broadening of hips
Body hair

192  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

Problems of Undernutrition. If undernutrition is neither prolonged nor especially 
severe, children usually recover from any growth deficits by growing much faster than 
normal once their diet becomes adequate. James Tanner (1990) views this catch-up 
growth as a basic principle of physical development. Presumably, children who have 
experienced short-term growth deficits because of malnutrition grow very rapidly in 
order to regain (or catch up to) their genetically programmed growth trajectory.

catch-up growth
a period of accelerated growth 
in which children who have 
 experienced growth deficits grow 
very rapidly to “catch up to” the 
growth trajectory that they are 
 genetically programmed to follow.

However, prolonged undernutrition has a more serious impact, especially during 
the first 5 years of life: brain growth may be seriously retarded and the child may re-
main relatively small in stature (Barrett & Frank, 1987; Tanner, 1990). These findings 
make sense when we recall that the first 5 years is a period when the brain normally 
gains about 65 percent of its eventual adult weight and the body grows to nearly two-
thirds of its adult height.

In many of the developing countries of Africa, Asia, and Latin America, as many as 
85 percent of all children under age 5 experience some form of undernutrition (Barrett 
& Frank, 1987). When children are severely undernourished, they are likely to suffer 
from either of two nutritional diseases—marasmus or kwashiorkor—each of which has a 
slightly different cause.

Marasmus affects babies who get insufficient protein and too few calories, as can 
easily occur if a mother is malnourished and does not have the resources to provide her 
child with a nutritious commercial substitute for mother’s milk. A victim of marasmus 
becomes very frail and wrinkled in appearance as growth stops and the body tissues 
begin to waste away. Even if these children survive, they remain small in stature and 
often suffer impaired social and intellectual development (Barrett & Frank, 1987).

marasmus
a growth-retarding disease affect-
ing infants who receive insuffi-
cient protein and too few calories.

Kwashiorkor affects children who get enough calories but little if any protein. As 
the disease progresses, the child’s hair thins, the face, legs, and abdomen swell with 
water, and severe skin lesions may develop. In many poor countries of the world, one 
of the few high-quality sources of protein readily available to children is mother’s milk. 
So breast-fed infants do not ordinarily suffer from marasmus unless their mothers 
are severely malnourished; however, they may develop kwashiorkor when they are 
weaned from the breast and denied their primary source of protein.

kwashiorkor
a growth-retarding disease affect-
ing children who receive enough 
calories but little if any protein.

In Western industrialized countries, the preschool children who do experience 
 protein/calorie deficiencies are rarely so malnourished as to develop marasmus or 
kwashiorkor. However, vitamin and mineral deficiencies affect large numbers of chil-
dren in the United States, particularly African American and Hispanic children from 
lower socioeconomic backgrounds (Pollitt, 1994). Especially common among infants 
and toddlers are iron and zinc deficiencies that occur because rapid growth early in 
life requires more of these minerals than a young child’s diet normally provides. Thus, 
children whose diets are deficient in zinc grow very slowly (Pollitt et al., 1996).

vitamin and mineral deficiency
a form of malnutrition in which 
the diet provides sufficient protein 
and calories but is lacking in one 
or more substances that promote 
normal growth.

Prolonged iron deficiency causes iron deficiency anemia,  a condition that not 
only makes children inattentive and listless, thereby restricting their opportunities for 
social interaction, but also retards their growth rates and is associated with poor perfor-
mances on tests of motor skills and intellectual development.

iron deficiency anemia
a listlessness caused by too 
little iron in the diet that makes 
children inattentive and may 
retard physical and intellectual 
development.

Problems of Overnutrition. Dietary excess (eating too much) is yet another form 
of poor nutrition that is increasing in Western societies and can have several long-
term consequences (Galuska et al., 1996). The most immediate effect of overnutrition 
is that children may become obese and face added risk of diabetes, high blood pressure, 
and heart, liver, or kidney disease. Obese children may also find it difficult to make 
friends with age-mates, who are apt to tease them about their size and shape. Indeed, 
obese children are often among the least popular students in grade-school classrooms 
(Sigelman, Miller, & Whitworth, 1986; Staffieri, 1967).

obese
a medical term describing individ-
uals who are at least 20 percent 
above the ideal weight for their 
height, age, and sex.

Obese grade-school children and adolescents are much more likely than their thin-
ner peers to be obese in later adolescence and adulthood (Cowley, 2001). Heredity defi-
nitely contributes to these trends (Stunkard et al., 1990). Yet, a genetic predisposition 

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  193

does not guarantee obesity. Highest levels of obesity are found among children 
who eat a high-fat diet and who do not get sufficient exercise to burn the calo-
ries they’ve consumed (Cowley, 2001; Fischer & Birch, 1995).

Bad eating habits that can lead to obesity are often established early in life 
(Birch, 1990). Some parents use food to reinforce desirable behaviors (for exam-
ple, “Clean your room and you can have some ice cream”), or they bribe their 
children to eat foods they do not want (“No dessert until you eat your peas”) 
(Olvera-Ezzell, Power, & Cousins, 1990; Smith, 1997). Unfortunately, children 
may attach a special significance to eating that extends far beyond its role in re-
ducing hunger if they are encouraged to view food as a reward. Moreover, use 
of high-fat desserts or snacks as a reward may convince young children that the 
healthier foods they are being “bribed” to eat must really be yucky stuff after all 
(Birch, Marlin, & Rotter, 1984).

In addition to their poor eating habits, obese children are less active than 
normal-weight peers. Of course, their inactivity may both contribute to obesity 
(obese children burn fewer calories) and be a consequence of their overweight 
condition. One strong clue that activity restriction contributes to obesity is 
that the amount of time children spend in the sedentary activity of watch-
ing television is one of the best predictors of future obesity (Cowley, 2001). 
 Television may also promote poor eating habits: not only do children tend 
to snack while passively watching TV, but the foods they see advertised are 
mostly high-calorie products containing lots of fat and sugar and few  beneficial 
nutrients (Tinsley, 1992).
This child’s swollen stomach and other-
wise emaciated appearance are symptoms 
of kwashiorkor. Without adequate protein 
in the diet, children with kwashiorkor are 
more susceptible to many diseases and 
may die from illnesses that well-nour-
ished children can easily overcome.

© Stephen Morrison/epa/Corbis/Wire/Corbis

Illnesses
Among children who are adequately nourished, common childhood illnesses 
such as measles, chicken pox, or even pneumonia have little if any effect on phys-
ical growth and development. Major illnesses that keep a child in bed for weeks 
may temporarily retard growth, but after recovering, the child will ordinarily 
show a growth spurt (catch-up growth) that makes up for the progress lost while he or 
she was sick (Tanner, 1990).

Yet, diseases are likely to permanently stunt the growth of children who are mod-
erately to severely undernourished. A poor diet weakens the immune system, so that 
childhood diseases strike an undernourished child sooner and harder (Pollitt et al., 
1996). Not only does malnutrition increase one’s susceptibility to disease, but diseases 
contribute to malnutrition by suppressing a child’s appetite and limiting the body’s 
ability to absorb and utilize nutrients (Pollitt, 1994). In developing countries where gas-
trointestinal infections and upper respiratory illnesses are common, young school-age 
children who have been relatively disease-free are already 1 to 2 inches taller and 3 to 
5 pounds heavier on average than their more “sickly” peers (Martorell, 1980; Roland, 
Cole, & Whitehead, 1977), and are outperforming them on a variety of cognitive tests 
as well (Pollitt, 1994).

Emotional Stress and Lack of Affection
Finally, otherwise healthy children who experience too much stress and too little 
 affection are likely to lag far behind their age-mates in physical growth and motor de-
velopment. This failure-to-thrive syndrome may characterize as many as 6 percent of 
preschool children in the United States and up to 5 percent of all patients admitted to 
pediatric hospitals (Lozoff, 1989).

Nonorganic failure to thrive is a growth disorder that appears early, usually by 
18 months of age. Babies who display it stop growing and appear to be wasting away, 
in much the same way that malnourished infants with marasmus do. These infants do 
not have an obvious illness, and no other biological cause for their condition is apparent. 

nonorganic failure to thrive
an infant growth disorder, caused 
by lack of attention and affection, 
that causes growth to slow dra-
matically or stop.

194  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

• 

Affected babies often have trouble feeding and, in many cases, their growth retarda-
tion is undoubtedly attributable to poor nutrition (Brockington, 1996; Lozoff, 1989). Of 
course, a major question is, why would an otherwise healthy baby have trouble feeding?

One clue comes from these babies’ behaviors around caregivers. They are gener-
ally apathetic and withdrawn, will often watch their caregivers closely, but are unlikely 
to smile or cuddle when they are picked up. Why? Because their caregivers are typically 
cool and aloof, impatient with them, and sometimes even physically abusive (Brocking-
ton, 1996). So even though caregivers may offer enough food for those babies to thrive, 
their impatience and hostility causes babies to withdraw and to become aloof to the 
point of feeding poorly and displaying few, if any, positive social responses.

Deprivation dwarfism is a second growth-related disorder that stems from emo-
tional deprivation and a lack of affection. It appears later, usually between 2 and 15 
years of age, and is characterized by small stature and dramatically reduced rates of 
growth, even though children who display this disorder do not look especially mal-
nourished and usually receive adequate nutrition and physical care. What seems to 
be lacking in their lives is a positive involvement with another person, namely with 
their primary caregivers, who themselves are likely to be depressed by an unhappy 
marriage, economic hardships, or some other personal problem (Brockington, 1996; 
Roithmaier et al., 1988). It appears that deprivation dwarfs grow very slowly because 
their emotional deprivation depresses the endocrine system and inhibits the production 
of growth hormone. Indeed, when these children are removed from their homes and 
begin to receive attention and affection, secretion of GH quickly resumes, and they dis-
play catch-up growth, even when they eat the same diet on which they formerly failed 
to thrive (Brockington, 1996; Gardner, 1972).

deprivation dwarfism
a childhood growth disorder 
that is triggered by emotional 
deprivation and characterized by 
decreased production of GH, slow 
growth, and small stature.

The prognoses for children affected by nonorganic failure to thrive and depriva-
tion dwarfism are very good if the caregiving problems responsible for these disorders 
are corrected by individual or family therapy, or if the affected child is placed with car-
ing foster parents (Brockington, 1996). However, if nonorganic failure to thrive is not 
identified and corrected in the first 2 years, or if the emotional neglect that underlies 
deprivation dwarfism persists for several years, affected children may remain smaller 
than normal and display long-term emotional problems and intellectual deficiencies as 
well (Drotar, 1992; Lozoff, 1989).

CONCEPT CHECK 5.3
Psychological Impacts of Puberty and Causes of Growth and Development

Check your understanding of the psychological impacts of 
puberty as well as the causes and correlates of growth and 
development by answering the following questions. Answers 
appear in the Appendix.

True or False: Indicate whether the following statement is 
true or false.

1. (T)(F) “Rites of passage” are rituals observed in 
many nonindustrialized countries that are used to 
mark the child’s puberty and transition from child 
to adolescent.

Matching: Match the follow-
ing nutritional deficits with 
their definitions.

2. kwashiorkor
3. marasmus
4. iron deficiency anemia
5. overnutrition

a.  a wasting away of body 
tissues caused by insuffi-
cient protein and calories
b.  a disease marked by a 
swollen abdomen and 
 severe skin lesions caused 
by insufficient protein
c.  a disease associated with 
diabetes, high blood pres-
sure, and heart or kidney 
disease
d.  a disease that makes 
children listless and 
 inattentive, retards their 
growth, and causes them 
to score poorly on tests of 
intelligence

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  195

In sum, failure to thrive provides yet another indication that children require love 
and responsive caregiving if they are to develop normally. Fortunately, there is hope for 
preventing these deprivation-related disorders if parents whose children are at risk can 
be identified early, which they often can be. Even before giving birth, women whose 
children may fail to thrive are more likely than other mothers to feel unloved by their 
parents, to reject their own mothers as models, and to say their own childhoods were 
unhappy. Within days of giving birth, these mothers are already having more problems 
feeding and soothing their babies than are other mothers (Lozoff, 1989). Clearly, these 
families need help and would almost certainly benefit from early interventions that 
teach parents how to be more sensitive and responsive caregivers.

Applying Developmental Themes to Physical Development

Before we close our discussion of physical development, let’s take a brief look at how 
our developmental themes are reflected in the various aspects of physical development, 
including the development of the brain and body, the development of motor skills, 
and puberty. Recall that our developmental themes include the active child, the inter-
play of nature and nurture in development, qualitative and quantitative developmental 
changes, and the holistic nature of development.

Our first theme is that of the active child, or how the child participates in his or her 
own development both intentionally and through unconscious implications of his or 
her nature. One dramatic piece of evidence that the child is active in development is the 
fact that the child’s early experiences direct the synaptic pruning that occurs in the first 
few years of life. Children who are reared in stimulating environments may develop 
dramatically different brain organizations than those who are reared in impoverished 
environments. We saw an example of this in the orphans who were left lying on their 
backs in cribs for the first 2 years of life and, as a result, were severely handicapped in 
their motor development when finally freed from this restriction. Further support for 
this active role in development came from Riesen’s work with dark-reared chimpan-
zees, which revealed that atrophy of the neurons that make up the optic nerve led to 
blindness if the young chimps were unable to see for longer than 7 months, suggest-
ing that the active use of these neurons was necessary for normal visual development. 
Turning to the development of motor skills, dynamical systems theory clearly sees the 
child as active in the development of motor skills early in life, as the infants use goals 
and objectives to actively reorganize existing motor capabilities into new and more 
complex action systems. And, finally, we saw evidence that the adolescent’s activity can 
even affect the timing of puberty. Adolescent females who are engaging in extremely 
strenuous physical activity and those who are afflicted with anorexia may begin men-
struating very late or stop after they have begun.

The interactions of nature and nurture in their effects on physical development 
expand the influence of the active child to include the environment in which the child is 
reared. For example, both heredity and environmental factors such as the food people 
eat, the diseases they may contract, and even the emotional climate of their lives can 
produce significant variations in the rates at which they grow and the statures they 
eventually attain. We saw that the early development of the brain is the result of both 
a biological program and early experiences. The effects on the timing of puberty also 
illustrate the interactions of nature and nurture on physical development. Both genetic 
influences (as demonstrated by twin and family studies) and environmental influences 
(such as the cessation of pubertal development seen in girls who are involved in ex-
tremely strenuous physical activity) interact to influence the timing of pubertal events.

Physical development across childhood and adolescence is marked by both qualita-
tive and quantitative changes. We saw that babies may remain the same length for days 
or weeks at a time before showing spurts of more than a centimeter in a single day, a 

Active

Passive
Discontinuity

Continuity

Holistic
Nature

Nurture

196  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

dramatic qualitative change. Quantitative changes mark the period of physical develop-
ment during middle childhood (ages 6 to 11) when children may seem to grow very 
little. This is because their rate of growth is slow and steady throughout these years. 
Another qualitative change concerns the body’s physical proportions. Across childhood, 
body shape changes from infancy to childhood, and then dramatically during the adoles-
cent growth spurt and puberty, when the child takes on adult proportions. Qualitative 
physical changes also influence cognitive abilities (which is also an example of the holis-
tic nature of development). We saw that researchers believe that the cognitive advances 
of adolescent experience occur only after a qualitative change in brain development in-
cluding reorganizations and specializations. And of course the adolescent growth spurt 
and the physical changes of puberty are a clear example of a qualitative change in physi-
cal development.

Finally, looking at the holistic nature of development, we saw many examples of 
the effects physical development can have on social, intellectual, and psychological 
aspects of development in this chapter. Indeed, these effects are the reason a chapter 
on physical development is included in a developmental psychology textbook! Some 
examples include the fact that individual differences in the rates at which children 
grow have strong consequences for their social and personality development. One 
area where such differences are seen is in the changes in the structures of the brain 
during adolescence, including myelinization of the higher brain centers and reorga-
nizations of the neural circuitry of the prefrontal cortex that are responsible for the 
dramatic changes in the types of thought that occupy adolescents as compared to 
younger children. Looking at motor skill development, we saw that the dynamical 
systems theory sees early motor development as a holistic enterprise, involving the 
infants’ cognitive goals and objectives, leading to the reorganization of simple motor 
skills into more complex motor systems. We saw that experienced crawlers and walk-
ers are better able to use landmarks to guide their adventures than are infants who 
have just begun to crawl or walk. This suggests that locomotion influences spatial 
memory, another example of how various aspects of development work together in 
a holistic manner. Turning to the physical changes of adolescence, we saw that physi-
cally active girls and teenagers experience important psychological benefits such as 
increased self-esteem. Furthermore, the many social and psychological implications 
of maturing early or late, for both girls and boys (but in opposite directions), are more 
evidence of how physical development is linked to other aspects of development in a 
holistic manner. 

SUMMARY

An Overview of Maturation and Growth

• The body is constantly changing between infancy and 
adulthood.

• Height and weight increase rapidly during the first 
2 years.

• Growth becomes more gradual across middle 
childhood.

• In early adolescence there is a rapid growth spurt 
when height and weight again increase rapidly.

• The shape of the body and body proportions also 
change because various body parts grow at different 
rates.

• Physical development follows a cephalocaudal (head 
downward) and a proximodistal (center outward) 

 direction: structures in the upper and central regions of 
the body mature before those in the lower and periph-
eral regions.

• Skeletal and muscular development parallel the 
changes occurring in height and weight.

• Bones become longer and thicker and gradually 
harden, completing their growth and development 
by the late teens.

• Skeletal age is a measure of physical maturation.

• Muscles increase in density and size, particularly 
 during the growth spurt of early adolescence.

• Physical growth is quite uneven, or asynchronous.

• The brain, the reproductive system, and the lymph 
tissues mature at different rates.

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  197

• There are sizable individual and cultural variations 
in physical growth and development.

Development of the Brain

• A brain growth spurt occurs during the last 3 months 
of the prenatal period and the first 2 years of life.

• Neurons form synapses with other neurons.

• Glia form to nourish the neurons and encase them 
in myelin—a waxy material that speeds the transmis-
sion of neural impulses.

• Many more neurons and synapses are formed than are 
needed.

• Those that are used often will survive.

• Neurons that are stimulated less often either die or 
lose their synapses and stand in reserve to compen-
sate for brain injuries.

• Up until puberty, the brain shows a great deal of 
plasticity, which allows it to change in response to 
experience and to recover from many injuries.

• The highest brain center, or cerebrum, consists of two 
hemispheres connected by the corpus callosum.

• Each hemisphere is covered by a cerebral cortex.

• The brain may be lateralized at birth so that the two 
hemispheres assume different functions.

• Children come to rely increasingly on one particular 
hemisphere or the other to perform each function.

• Myelinization and reorganization of the neural circuitry 
of the cerebral cortex continue throughout adolescence.

Motor Development

• Like the physical structures of the body, motor devel-
opment proceeds in a cephalocaudal and proximodistal 
direction.

• Motor skills evolve in a definite sequence.

• Infants gain control over their heads, necks, and 
upper arms before they become proficient with their 
legs, feet, and hands.

• Motor skills that infants display do not unfold according 
to a maturational timetable; experience is important as 
well.

• Institutionalized children who have few opportuni-
ties to practice motor skills have retarded motor 
development.

• Cross-cultural research shows that motor develop-
ment can be accelerated.

• According to dynamical systems theory, each new 
motor skill represents an active and intricate reorgani-
zation of several existing capabilities that infants under-
take to achieve important objectives.

• Fine motor skills improve dramatically in the 1st year.

• Prereaching is replaced by voluntary reaching.

• The clawlike ulnar grasp is replaced by the pincer 
grasp.

• Reaching and grasping skills transform infants into 
skillful manipulators.

• Emerging motor skills often thrill parents and allow 
new forms of play.

• Emerging motor skills support other aspects of percep-
tual, cognitive, and social development.

• With each passing year, children’s motor skills 
improve.

• Boys become notably stronger than girls early 
in adolescence because of their greater muscular 
 development and the fact that girls are less inclined 
to remain physically active.

Puberty: The Physical Transition from  
Child to Adult

• At about age 10½ for females and age 13 for males, the 
adolescent growth spurt begins.

• Adolescents grow taller and heavier.

• Adolescents’ bodies and faces assume a more adult-
like appearance.

• Sexual maturation

• begins about the same time as the adolescent growth 
spurt and

• follows a predictable sequence.

• For girls, puberty includes

• the onset of breast and pubic-hair development,

• a widening of the hips, enlarging of the uterus and 
vagina,

• menarche (first menstruation), and

• completion of breast and pubic-hair growth.

• For boys, puberty includes

• development of the testes and scrotum,

• the emergence of pubic hair,

• the growth of the penis and the ability to ejaculate,

• the appearance of facial hair, and

• a lowering of the voice.

• There are great individual differences in the timing of 
sexual maturation.

• The secular trend refers to the fact that people in 
 industrialized societies are reaching sexual maturity 
earlier than in the past.

• People are also growing taller and heavier than 
 people in the past.

• The secular trend is due to improved nutrition and 
health care.

Causes and Correlates of Physical Development

• Physical development results from a complex interplay 
between biological and environmental forces.

• Individual genotypes set limits for stature, shape, 
and tempo of growth.

• Growth is heavily influenced by hormones released 
by the endocrine glands as regulated by the pituitary.

198  PART TWO 
Biological Foundations of Development

• Growth hormone (GH) regulates growth through-
out childhood.

• At adolescence, other endocrine glands secrete 
hormones.

• Estrogen from the ovaries triggers sexual develop-
ment in girls.

• Testosterone from the testes instigates sexual devel-
opment in boys.

• Adequate nutrition, in the form of total calories, 
 protein, and vitamins and minerals, is necessary for 
children to reach their growth potentials.

• Marasmus, kwashiorkor, and iron deficiency 
anemia are three growth-retarding diseases that 
stem from undernutrition.

• In industrialized countries, obesity is a nutritional 
problem, with many physical and psychological 
consequences.

• Chronic infectious diseases can combine with poor 
 nutrition to stunt physical and intellectual growth.

• Nonorganic failure to thrive and deprivation dwarf-
ism illustrate that affection and sensitive, responsive 
caregiving are important to ensure  normal growth.

CHAPTER 5 PRACTICE QUIZ

Multiple Choice: Check your understanding of physical 
development by selecting the best choice for each question. 
Answers appear in the Appendix.

1. Which of the following statements about physical 
 development is false?

a. Babies who walk early are inclined to be especially 
bright.
b. The average 2-year-old is already about half of his 
or her adult height.
c. Half the nerve cells (neurons) in the average baby’s 
brain die (and are not replaced) over the first few 
years of life.
2. Which of the following statements about physical 
 development is true?

a. Most babies can walk alone, with sufficient en-
couragement and practice, by the time they are 
6 months old.
b. Hormones have little effect on human growth and 
development until puberty.
c. Emotional trauma can seriously impair the growth of 
young children, even those who are adequately nour-
ished, free from illness, and not physically abused.
3. Physical development occurs in a head-downward 
direction across prenatal, child, and adolescent devel-
opment. The name of this principle is the _________ 
principle.

a. proximodistal
b. cephalocaudal

c. ossification
d. vertical
4. Which body system actually exceeds adult size during 
child and adolescent development?

a. Brain and head
b. General growth

c. Lymphoid
d. Reproductive
5. The _________ brain cells are the most numerous, 
 produce myelin, and continue to form throughout life.

a. glia
b. cerebral

c. neurons
d. synapse
6. The bundle of neural fibers that connects the two 
hemispheres of the brain and transmit information 
from one hemisphere to the other is called the

a. cerebrum.
b. cerebral cortex.

c. lateralization.
d. corpus collosum.
7. The _________ views motor development as a com-
plex transaction among the child’s physical capabilities 
and goals and the experiences she has.

a. maturational viewpoint
b. experiential viewpoint

c. dynamical systems theory
d. transactional theory

KEY TERMS

adolescent growth spurt 187
brain growth spurt 173
catch-up growth 192
cephalocaudal development 171
cerebral cortex 176

cerebral lateralization 177
cerebrum 176
corpus callosum 176
deprivation dwarfism 194
dynamical systems theory 182

estrogen 191
glia 174
growth hormone (GH) 190
iron deficiency anemia 192
kwashiorkor 192

marasmus 192
menarche 188
myelinization 175
neurons 173
nonorganic failure to thrive 193

CHAPTER 5 
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development  199

obese 192
physically active play 186
pincer grasp 183
pituitary 190

plasticity 174
proximodistal development 171
puberty 187
secular trend 189

skeletal age 172
synapse 173
synaptogenesis 174
testosterone 191

ulnar grasp 183
vitamin and mineral 
deficiency 192

MEDIA RESOURCES

Log in to CengageBrain to access the resources your 
 instructor requires. For this book, you can access:

CourseMate brings course concepts to life with 
 interactive learning, study, and exam preparation 
tools that support the printed textbook. A textbook- specific 
website, Psychology CourseMate includes an integrated 
interactive e-book and other interactive learning tools 
 including quizzes, flashcards, videos, and more.

More than just an interactive study guide, WebTutor is an 
anytime, anywhere customized learning solution with an 
e-book, keeping you connected to your textbook, instruc-
tor, and classmates. 

Visit www.cengagebrain.com to access your 
account and purchase materials.

Purestock/Jupiter Images

This page has been intentionally left blank. 

