Photo © 2009 by Jake Davies · ojisanjake.blogspot.de

PDF/UA

ISO 14289: The new standard  
for universally accessible  
PDF documents and forms

PDF Association · www.pdfa.org

• When is a PDF universally accessible?

• What should PDF developers know?

• Where does PDF/UA make a difference?

Creating PDF/UA

An assertion of PDF/UA conformance places stringent 
demands on both document authoring software and the 
author responsible for the conformance status of a particular 
document. In PDF, text strings of arbitrary lengths may occur 
in almost any content stream for a wide variety of more-or-
less unfortunate reasons. Developers can take very little for 
granted, but PDF/UA ensures a focus on what matters for 
accessibility purposes. PDF/UA makes it possible to deliver 
­accessible content with the reliability that is a hallmark of PDF.

To comply with PDF/UA, all content on the PDF page must be 
correctly categorized as artifact or real content. All real con­
tent must then be correctly characterized in semantic terms 
and a tags tree provided, to indicate the logical reading order 
of the document.

High quality input PDF files are required, including several 
specific technical requirements for font embedding and 
­character encoding, among other requirements. 

Using PDF/UA

Conformance with ISO 14289 enables a top-quality reading 
and navigating experience with all types of conforming 
assistive technology. Organizations can use PDF/UA as part of 
their overall strategy to comply with applicable accessibility 
laws, regulations or best practices. PDF/UA enables…

• Access to content in a structured, logical reading order 
complete with applicable semantics
• High-quality results when accessing PDF content on mobile 
devices, smart-phones,  e-readers and tablet PCs
• Text reuse (copy & paste, automated content extraction)
• Enhanced search results

Consumers of PDF/UA conforming PDF files include PDF 
readers, screen readers, magnification and text re-flow tools, 
Braille printers, text-to-speech (TTS) systems, content reuse 
and re-purposing implementations as well as search engines.

The PDF/UA Competence Center

Within the PDF Association, accessibility experts, PDF devel­
opers and supporters of PDF/UA work together in the PDF/UA 
Competence Center to discuss strategies, develop educational 
material and research technical implementation details. We 
identify opportunities to speak at conferences and organize 
webinars or in-person-events to educate developers, policy 
makers and end users about PDF/UA. 

Join the PDF/UA Competence Center!

If your organization is already a member of the PDF ­Association, 
consider joining the conversation and activities in the PDF 
Association’s PDF/UA Competence Center – just send an email to 
info@pdfa.org for more information or to sign up right away.  

If your organization cannot become a member of the PDF 
Association you may still join as an individual and become part 
of the PDF/UA Competence Center’s meetings, discussions, 
public events and development efforts. Again, just send an 
email to info@pdfa.org for more information.

Membership in the PDF Association

Founded in 2006, the PDF Association exists to promote the 
adoption and implementation of International Standards for 
PDF technology.  The activities of the PDF Association ­cover 
the PDF standard itself as well as PDF/A, PDF/E, PDF/UA, 
­PDF/‌VT and PDF/X. We work closely with ISO on the develop­
ment of future PDF standards. If you wish to participate in the 
most influential association for PDF to shape what PDF will 
look like in the future, please get in touch:

 

Association for  Digital Document 
Standards e.V.  
– PDF Association – 
Neue Kantstraße 14 
14057 Berlin 

Tel: +49 30 39 40 50-0  ·  Fax: +49 30 39 40 50-99  
www.pdfa.org  ·  info@pdfa.org ·  Registered in: Berlin, District 
Court of Berlin-Charlottenburg, VR 26099 B  ·  VAT ID: DE251189066

What is PDF/UA?

PDF/UA is the common name for ISO 14289. An international 
standard approved in 2012,  PDF/UA defines how to represent 
electronic documents in the PDF format in a manner that al­
lows the file to be accessible. The standard identifies PDF com­
ponents and properties relevant to this objective and provides 
requirements and restrictions on the form of their use.

PDF was not originally designed for accessibility; the focus 
was on providing accurate and reliable on-screen and printed 
results for page-based content. In 2000 the PDF specification 
was extended by a mechanism called “tagging” to make it 
possible to add structure and semantics to page content. 
PDF/UA defines the correct use of PDF tagging for maximum 
accessibility.

In parallel with W3C’s Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 
(WCAG 2.0) project, AIIM and Adobe Systems started the 
PDF/UA Committee in 2004 to explore and develop specific 
technical requirements for accessible PDF. Following the ISO 
standardization of PDF in 2008, the working document was 
redrafted to use ISO 32000 and PDF/UA began development 
towards publication as an ISO standard. In 2010, PDF/UA was 
accepted as an ISO New Work Item. In 2012, ­PDF/‌UA publishes 
as ISO 14289.

PDF/UA makes the world a better place

• Increases likelihood that content provided in the PDF format is 
more accessible to more people than ever before
• Establishes the technical requirements necessary to encourage 
development of accessible PDF creation and reading software 
• Provides an International Standard to guide software procure­

ment and development
• Provides a technically-specific road-map to conformance with 
WCAG 2.0 in PDF content
• Reduces liability exposure and minimizes legal uncertainty
• Enables high quality, reliable reuse and re-purposing of PDFs
• Implies eligibility for the “A” conformance level of PDF/A, the 
widely adopted ISO standard for PDF based archiving

Why does the world need PDF/UA?

Tagged PDF first entered the market well over a decade ago. 
Why do we need an ISO standard for this PDF feature?

PDF is highly capable but internally complex. Regarding 
tagging and content reuse, the core PDF language includes 
significant ambiguities that have led to confusion and re­
duced interoperability. Market pressure for a reliable content 
accessibility and reuse mechanism for PDF content has been 
building for years, but key public-sector regulations to-date 
have tended to provide guidance in HTML and web-specific 
terms, leaving implementers without clear guidance on how 
to ensure the PDF files they create are made both reliable and 
accessible in the assistive technology context.

For these and other reasons high-quality tagged PDF has been 
slow to find broad acceptance. Today, over 70% of PDFs pro­
duced on desktop computers are still completely untagged, 
while those PDFs that are tagged are frequently substandard. 
As a consequence, most users who rely on tags in PDF to read 
have learned to dislike PDF files for the unreliable, ­disjointed 
and grossly unsatisfactory experience they’ve so often ­received.

PDF/UA delivers enhanced communications 
to persons with disabilities

PDF/UA will offer demonstrable high-quality results to end-us­
ers with disabilities using readily-available PDF/UA conforming 
(and near-conforming) readers and assistive technology.

It is to be expected that the PDF/UA standard will soon be 
referenced by equal access legislation and policies in Europe, 
North America and elsewhere, whether for government agen­
cies, public procurement regulations or organizations in the 
private sector. 

PDF/UA will quickly become an indispensable building block 
for any comprehensive organization-wide strategy to ensure 
­documents and forms conform with applicable accessibility 
regulations, reducing liability exposure.

PDF/UA is a reality. 
What are you going to do about it?

PDF/UA is coming soon, and there’s something for everyone:

• Authoring software used to create PDF files, including OCR 
software, office programs and publishing tools

• Editing software used to modify or tag existing PDF files

• Reader software used to process a PDF file for use in a viewer 
or other consumer implementation

• Assistive Technology software used interactively with PDF 
readers to provide access to users with disabilities

PDF/UA may soon be a requirement – or a “suggestion” – for 
your organization or its customers. It’s time to know more.

How can we help?

Members and non-members alike will always find the PDF 
Association website, www.pdfa.org,  a good place to start.  
The organization has made available video recordings and 
slides of technical presentations regarding  PDF/UA from the 
PDF Association’s 2012 Technical Conference.  Members of the 
PDF ­Association benefit from a network of renowned experts, 
extensive internal resources and active collaboration in the 
PDF/UA Competence Center.

