C H A P T E R
Physical Development: 
The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development
5
An Overview of Maturation and Growth
Development of the Brain
Motor Development
Focus on Research: Sports Participation and Self-Esteem Among Adolescent Females
Puberty: The Physical Transition from Child to Adult
Causes and Correlates of Physical Development
Applying Developmental Themes to Physical Development
“My, my, she is already walking! What a smart little girl!”
“Look at you go. Oops, fall down, go boom!”
“Get your rest, little guy, it will help you grow big and strong.”
“He’s growing like a weed—and his arms are too long!”
“Only 11 and she’s got her period. What’s the world coming to?”
“All that girl thinks about is boys.”
HAVE YOU EVER HEARD  adults make these kinds of statements about developing server than the rapid transformation of a seemingly dependent and immobile little baby into children and adolescents? Few aspects of development are more interesting to the casual ob- a running, jumping bundle of energy who grows and changes at what may seem to be an as-tounding pace, and who may one day surpass the physical stature of his or her parents. Those physical changes that many find so fascinating are the subject of this chapter.
motor skills throughout childhood. Then we will consider the impact of puberty—both the dramatic physical changes that adolescents experience and their social and psycho-We will begin by focusing on the changes that occur in the body, the brain, and  logical impacts. Finally, we will end the chapter by discussing the factors that influence physical growth and development throughout the first 20 years of life.
may assume that you know quite a bit about physical development. Yet students often Having experienced most (if not all) of the changes covered in this chapter, you discover that there is much they don’t know. To check your own knowledge, take a minute to decide whether the following statements are true or false:
1. Babies who walk early are inclined to be especially bright.
2. The average 2-year-old is already about half of his or her adult height.
169
34524_ch05.indd   169 10/10/12   8:01 PM170    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
 
• 
3. Half the nerve cells in the average baby’s brain die over the first few years of life.
4. enable a 6-month-old to walk alone.Most children walk when they are ready, and no amount of encouragement will 
5. A person’s hormones have little effect on human growth and development until puberty.
6. Emotional trauma can seriously impair the physical growth of young children, even those who are adequately nourished, free from illness, and not physically abused.
cuss these issues throughout the chapter. (If you would like immediate feedback, the Jot down your responses and we will see how you did on this “pretest” as we dis-correct answers appear at the bottom of the page.)
An Overview of Maturation and Growth
Adults are often amazed at how quickly children grow. Even tiny babies don’t remain  tiny for long: in the first few months of life, they gain nearly an ounce each day and  an inch each month. Yet the dramatic increases in height and weight that we see are  accompanied by a number of important internal developments in the muscles, bones,  and central nervous system that will largely determine the physical feats that children are capable of performing at different ages. In this section of the chapter, we will briefly chart the course of physical development from birth through adolescence and see that  there is a clear relationship between the external aspects of growth that are so notice-able and the internal changes that are much harder to detect.
Changes in Height and Weight
Babies grow very rapidly during the first 2 years, often doubling their birth weight by year. Growth is very uneven in infancy. One study found  that babies may remain the same length for days or weeks 4 to 6 months of age and tripling it (to about 21 to 22 pounds) by the end of the 1st at a time before showing spurts of more than a centimeter in a single day (Lampl, Veldhuis, & Johnson, 1992). By age 2, toddlers are already half their eventual adult height and have quadrupled their birth weight to 27 to 30 pounds. If children continued to grow at this rapid pace until age 18, they would stand at about 12 feet 3 inches and weigh several tons!
inches in height and 6 to 7 pounds in weight each year. Dur-From  age  2  until  puberty,  children  gain  about  2  to  3  ing middle childhood (ages 6 to 11), children may seem to  grow very little; over an entire year, gains of 2 inches and  6 pounds are hard to detect on a child who stands 4 to 4½  feet tall and weighs 60 to 80 pounds (Eichorn, 1979). But as shown in  Figure 5.1, physical growth and development are  once again obvious at puberty, when adolescents enter a 2-  to 3-year growth spurt, during which they may post an an-nual gain of 10 to 15 pounds and 2 to 4 inches in height. After this large growth spurt, there are typically small increases in  height until full adult stature is attained in the mid- to late teens (Tanner, 1990).
• 
20251015
Girls Boys5 5
Age in years10 15 20
birth through adolescence. At about age 10½, girls begin Figure 5.1 Gain in height per year by males and females from their growth spurt. Boys follow some 2½ years later and grow R. H. Whithouse, and A. Takaishi, 1966, pp. 454–471. faster than girls once their growth begins. Based on a figure in Archives of the Diseases in Childhood, 41, by J. M. Tanner, 
Height gain, cm/yr
Answers to pretest: 1. F; 2. T; 3. T; 4. T; 5. F; 6. T
34524_ch05.indd   170 10/10/12   8:01 PMCHAPTER 5  Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    171
•  Figure 5.2  Proportions of the human body from the fetal period through adulthood. The head represents 50 percent of body length at 2 months after conception but only 12 to 13 percent of adult stature. In contrast, the legs constitute about 12 to 13 percent of the total length of a 2-month-old fetus, but 50 percent of the height of a 25-year-old adult.
Changes in Body Proportions
The newborn’s head is already 70 percent of its eventual adult size and represents one-To a casual observer, newborns may appear to be “all head”—and for good reason.  quarter of total body length, the same fraction as the legs.
cephalocaudal development ceeds in a cephalocaudal (head downward) direction. The trunk grows fastest during the ing adolescence the trunk once again becomes the fastest-growing segment of the body, As a child grows, body shape rapidly changes (see  Figure 5.2). Development pro-although the legs are also growing rapidly at this time. When we reach our eventual adult 1st year. At 1 year of age, a child’s head now accounts for only 20 percent of total body stature, our legs will account for 50 percent of total height and our heads only 12 percent.length. From the child’s 1st birthday until the adolescent growth spurt, the legs grow rap-idly, accounting for more than 60 percent of the increase in height (Eichorn, 1979). Dur- • a sequence of physical maturation 
and growth that proceeds from the head (cephalic region) to the tail (or caudal region).
© Bob Daemmrich/The Image Works 
34524_ch05.indd   171 10/10/12   8:01 PM
2 months(fetal) 5 months(fetal) newborn 2 years 6 years 12 years 25 years
© Cengage Learning
proximodistal developmenta sequence of physical matura-
tion and growth that proceeds from the center of the body (the proximal region) to the extremities (distal regions).
(center outward) direction (Kohler & Rigby, 2003). During prenatal development, for and then the hands and feet. Throughout infancy and childhood, the arms and legs Whexample, the chest and internal organs form first, followed by the arms and legs, ile children grow upward, they are also growing outward in a proximodistal  continue to grow faster than the hands and feet. However, this center-outward  growth pattern reverses just before puberty, when the hands and feet begin to grow rapidly and become the first body parts to reach adult proportions, followed by the arms and legs and, finally, the trunk. One reason teenagers often appear so clumsy or awkward is that their hands and feet (and later their arms and legs) may suddenly seem much too large for the rest of their bodies (Tanner, 1990).
Skeletal Development
tilage that will gradually ossify (harden) into bony material. At birth, most of the The skeletal structures that form during the prenatal period are initially soft car- infant’s bones are soft, pliable, and difficult to break. One reason that newborns  cannot sit up or balance themselves when pulled to a standing position is that their bones are too small and too flexible.
The neonate’s skull consists of several soft bones that can be compressed to Body proportions change rapidly over the first few years as chubby toddlers become long-legged children. allow the child to pass through the cervix and the birth canal, making childbirth  easier for the mother and the baby. These skull bones are separated by six soft 172    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
A B age 2, with pliable points at the seams where skull bones join. These seams, or sutures, spots, or fontanelles, that are gradually filled in by minerals to form a single skull by allow the skull to expand as the brain grows larger.
more (rather than fewer) bones as the child matures. In Other  parts  of  the  body—namely,  the  ankles,  feet,  wrists Figure 5.3, we see that the and  hands—develop  wrist and hand bones of a 1-year-old are both fewer and less interconnected than the corresponding skeletal equipment of an adolescent.
• 
© Cengage Learning her wrist and hand (as in Figure 5.3). The X-ray shows the number of bones and the extent of their ossification, which is then interpretable as a skeletal age.  Using this One method of estimating a child’s level of physical maturation is to X-ray his or  technique, researchers have found that girls mature faster than boys. At birth, girls are  only 4 to 6 weeks ahead of boys in their level of skeletal development; but by age 12, the gender difference has widened to 2 full years (Tanner, 1990).
•  amount of skeletal development seen in (A) the hand of an Figure 5.3 X-rays showing the average male infant at 12 months or an average female infant at 10 months and (B) the hand of an average 13-year-old male or an average 10½-year-old female. • 
Not all parts of the skeleton grow and harden at the same rate. The skull and hands For all practical purposes, skeletal development is complete by age 18, although the mature first, whereas the leg bones continue to develop until the mid- to late teens. widths (or thicknesses) of the skull, leg bones, and hands increase slightly throughout life (Tanner, 1990).
skeletal agea measure of physical maturation 
based on the child’s level of skel-etal development.
Muscular Development
Newborns are born with all the muscle fibers they will ever have (Tanner,  1990).  At  birth,  muscle  tissue  is  35  percent water, and it accounts for no more than 18 to 24 percent of a baby’s body weight (Marshall, 1977). However, muscle fibers  soon begin to grow as the cellular fluid in muscle tissue is bolstered by the addition of protein and salts.
proximodistal directions, with muscles in the head and neck Muscular development proceeds in cephalocaudal and  maturing before those in the trunk and limbs. Like many other  aspects  of  physical  development,  the  maturation  of muscle tissue occurs very gradually over childhood and then accelerates  during  early  adolescence.  One  consequence  of  this muscular growth spurt is that members of both sexes become noticeably stronger, although increases in both mus-cle mass and physical strength (as measured in tests of large- muscle activity) are more dramatic for boys than for girls  (Malina, 1990). By the mid-20s, skeletal muscle accounts for 40 percent of the body weight of an average male, compared with 24 percent for the average female.
•  Figure 5.4 Growth curves for different body systems. Each  Age in years Variations in Physical Developmentcurve plots the size of a group of organs or body parts as a percentage of their size at age 20 (which is the 100 percent J. M. Tanner, 1962. Oxford, England: Blackwell. Copyright  © 1962 by Blackwell Scientific Publications, Inc. Reprinted level on the vertical scale). The “general” curve describes by permission of Blackwell Science, Ltd.changes in the body’s size as well as the growth of respiratory and digestive organs and musculature. The brain and head grow more rapidly than the body in general, and the reproductive organs are the slowest to reach adult size. (The lymph nodes and other parts of the lymphoid system, which function as part of the immune system, also grow rapidly and actually exceed adult size during late childhood and adolescence.) From Growth at Adolescence, 2nd ed., by 
To this point, we have been discussing sequences of physi-cal growth that all humans display. However, physical devel- opment is a very uneven process in which different bodily  systems display unique growth patterns. As we see in  Fig- ure 5.4, the brain and head actually grow much faster and  are quicker to reach adult proportions than the rest of the body,  whereas  the  genitals  and  other reproductive  organs grow very slowly throughout childhood and develop rapidly  in adolescence. Notice also that growth of the lymph tis- sues—which make up part of the immune system and help children fight off infections—actually overshoots adult levels late in childhood, before declining rapidly in adolescence.
Size attained as percentage of total postnatal growth
100200%120140160180
34524_ch05.indd   172 10/10/12   8:01 PM
406080 Lymphoid200 Brain and head
ReproductiveGeneral2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20CHAPTER 5  Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    173
Individual Variations
tems an uneven or asynchronous process, Not only is the development of body sys-but there are sizable individual variations in the rates at which children grow (Kohler & Rigby, 2003). Look carefully at  Figure 5.5. These two boys are the same age, although  one has already reached puberty and looks much older. As we will see later in the chap- ter, two grade-school friends might begin  the pubertal transition from child to adult as much as 5 years apart!
• 
Cultural Variations
Australia. In addition, there are cultural differences in the rate of physical growth. and Finally, growth Africa tend to be smaller than those from subcultural and there development. are variations meaningful In in general, cultural  physical people North from America, Asia, Northern Asian American and African American children, for example, tend to mature faster South  America, Europe, and  and  than  European  American  and  European  children  (Berkey  et  al.,  1994;  Herman-  Giddens et al., 1997).© Ellen Senisi/The Image Works
•  Figure 5.5  There are large individual variations in the timing of the adolescent growth spurt, as we see in comparing the stature of these two boys of the same age.
in the maturation of different body systems are built into our species’ heredity—that is, What accounts for these variations in growth? Current thinking is that asynchronies  the common maturational program that all humans share (Tanner, 1990). And later in the chapter, we will see that heredity, in concert with such environmental factors as the  food people eat, the diseases they may encounter, and even the emotional climate in which they live, can produce significant variations in the rates at which they grow and the statures they attain (Kohler & Rigby, 2003).
Development of the Brain
The brain grows at an astounding rate early in life, increasing from 25 percent of its  eventual adult weight at birth to 75 percent of adult weight by age 2. Indeed, the last  3 prenatal months and the first 2 years after birth have been termed the period of the  brain growth spurt because more than half of one’s adult brain weight is gained at  this time (Glaser, 2000). Between the 7th prenatal month and a child’s 1st birthday,  the brain increases in weight by about 1.7 grams a day, or more than a milligram per minute.
brain growth spurt
 prenatal month and 2 years of age the period between the 7th  when more than half of the child’s eventual brain weight is gained.
development. Let’s take a closer look at the internal organization and development about how or when various parts of the brain mature and affect other aspects of However, an increase in brain weight is a general index that tells us very little of the brain.
synapsethe connective space (juncture) 
between one nerve cell (neuron) and another. Neural Development and Plasticity
The human brain and nervous system consist of more than a trillion highly specialized of the brain and nervous system—the cells that receive and transmit neural impulses.  cells that work together to transmit electrical and chemical signals across many tril- lions of synapses, or connective spaces between the cells. Neurons are the basic unit 
neuronsnerve cells that receive and trans-mit neural impulses.
34524_ch05.indd   173 10/10/12   8:02 PM174    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
Neurons are produced in the neural tube of the developing embryo. From there, they migrate along pathways laid down by a network of guiding cells to form the major  parts of the brain. The vast majority of the neurons a person will ever have—some  100 to 200 billion of them—have already formed by the end of the second trimester  of pregnancy, before the brain growth spurt has even begun (Kolb & Fantie, 1989; 
development of a second type of nerve cell, called glia, which nourish the neurons and eventually encase them in insulating sheaths of a waxy substance called myelin. Glia What, then, accounts for the brain growth spurt? One major contributor is the  are far more numerous than neurons are, and they continue to form throughout life (Tanner, 1990).
glianerve cells that nourish neurons 
and encase them in insulating sheaths of myelin.
Neural Development: Cell Differentiation and Synaptogenesis
Influenced  functions—as cells of the visual or auditory areas of the brain, for example. If a by  the  sites  to  which  they  migrate,  neurons  assume  specialized  neuron that would normally migrate to the visual area of the brain is instead trans-planted  to  the  area  that  controls  hearing,  it  will  change  to  become  an  auditory  neuron  instead of a visual neuron (Johnson, 1998, 2005). So individual neurons have 
synaptogenesis Meanwhile,  the  process  of  synaptogenesis—the  formation  of  synaptic  connec-formation of connections (syn- tions among neurons—proceeds rapidly during the brain growth spurt. This brings  us to an intriguing fact about the developing nervous system: the average infant has  far more neurons and neural connections than adults do (Elkind, 2001). The reason is 
apses) among neurons.
plasticity 2000). As William Greenough and his colleagues (1987) explain, the brain has evolved brain—the fact that its cells are highly responsive to the effects of experience (Stiles, What is happening here reflects the remarkable plasticity of the young infant’s so that it produces an excess of neurons and synapses in preparation for receiving any  and all kinds of sensory and motor stimulation that a human being could conceiv-
capacity for change; a develop-mental state that has the poten-tial to be shaped by experience.
Neural Plasticity: The Role of Experience
ment of the brain and central nervous system? The first clue came from research by How do we know that early experience plays such a dramatic role in the develop-
34524_ch05.indd   174
Rakic, 1991). Until recently, it was thought that no new neurons were produced after  a baby was born. However, scientists have established that formation of new neurons  in the hippocampus (an area of the brain important to learning and memory) occurs  throughout life (Kemperman & Gage, 1999).
the potential to serve any neural function, and the function each serves depends on  where it ends up.
that neurons that successfully interconnect with other neurons crowd out those that don’t, so that about half the neurons produced early in life also die early (Elkind, 2001;  Janowsky & Finlay, 1986). Meanwhile, surviving neurons form hundreds of synapses,  many of which will disappear if the neuron is not properly stimulated (Huttenlocher,  1994). If we likened the developing brain to a house under construction, we might  imagine a builder who merrily constructs many more rooms and hallways than he or she needs and later goes back and knocks about half of them out!
ably experience. Of course, no human being has this broad a range of experiences, so  much of one’s neural circuitry remains unused. Presumably, then, neurons and syn- apses that are most often stimulated continue to function. Other surviving neurons  that are stimulated less often lose their synapses (a process called synaptic pruning) and stand in reserve to compensate for brain injuries or to support new skills (Elkind, 2001;  Huttenlocher, 1994). Note the implication: the development of the brain early in life is not due entirely to the unfolding of a maturational program, but is instead the result of  both a biological program and early experience (Greenough, Black, & Wallace, 1987; Johnson, 1998, 2005).
10/10/12   8:02 PMCHAPTER 5 
Austin Riesen and his colleagues (Riesen, 1947; Riesen et al., 1951). Riesen’s subjects were infant chimpanzees that were reared in the dark for periods ranging up to 16  months. His results were striking. Dark-reared chimps experienced atrophy of the  retina and the neurons that make up the optic nerve. This atrophy was reversible  if the animal’s visual deprivation did not exceed 7 months, but it was irreversible 
exposing participants to enriched environments that provide a wide variety of stimula-Might we then foster the neural development of an immature, malleable brain by  tion? Absolutely. Animals raised with lots of companions and many toys to play with have brains that are heavier and display more extensive networks of neural connections 
sessed in 221 children at a gestational age of 18 weeks, again at birth, and finally at In one human study, head circumference, a rough indicator of brain size, was as- 9 years of age. The head circumferences of children from high-socioeconomic-status  (SES) homes, and those whose mothers had earned college degrees, were significantly 
Brain Differentiation and Growth
Not all parts of the brain develop at the same rate. At birth, the most highly developed most directly implicated in voluntary bodily movements, perception, and higher in- tellectual activities such as learning, thinking, and language. The first areas of the areas are the lower (subcortical) brain centers, which control states of consciousness, cerebrum to mature are the primary motor areas (which control simple motor activi-inborn reflexes, and vital biological functions such as digestion, respiration, and elimi-ties such as waving the arms) and the primary sensory areas (which control sensory processes such as vision, hearing, smelling, and tasting). Thus, one reason human  neonates are reflexive, “sensory-motor” beings is that only the sensory and motor  areas of the cortex are functioning well at birth. By 6 months of age, the primary  motor areas of the cerebral cortex have developed to the point that they now direct 
Myelinization
As brain cells proliferate and grow, some of the glia begin to produce a waxy substance called myelin, which forms a sheath around individual neurons. This myelin sheath acts  as an insulator to speed up the transmission of neural impulses, allowing the brain to communicate more efficiently with different parts of the body.
myelinizationthe process by which neurons are 
enclosed in waxy myelin sheaths that will facilitate the transmis-sion of neural impulses. the maturation of the rest of the nervous system. At birth or shortly thereafter, the Myelinization follows a definite chronological sequence that is consistent with  pathways between the sense organs and the brain are reasonably well myelinated. 
34524_ch05.indd   175
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    175
and often led to total blindness if the deprivation lasted longer than a year. So neu- rons that are not properly stimulated will degenerate (Elkind, 2001; Rapoport et al., 2001).
than those of litter-mates raised under standard laboratory conditions (Greenough &  Black, 1992; Rosenzweig, 1984). What’s more, the brains of animals raised in stimulat-ing environments lose some of their complexity if the animals are moved to less stimu-lating quarters (Thompson, 1993).
larger than the head circumferences of children from low-SES homes and whose moth-ers had no degrees (Gale et al., 2004). So, even though genes may provide rough guide-lines as to how the brain should be configured, early experience largely determines the brain’s specific architecture (Rapoport et al., 2001).
nation. Surrounding these structures are the cerebrum and cerebral cortex, the areas most of the infant’s movements. Inborn responses such as the palmar grasp and the  Babinski reflex should have disappeared by now, thus indicating that the higher corti- cal centers are assuming proper control over the more primitive subcortical areas of the brain.
10/10/12   8:02 PM176    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
As a result, the neonate’s sensory equipment is in good working order. As neural pathways between the brain and the skeletal muscles myelinate (in a cephalocaudal  and proximodistal pattern), the child becomes capable of increasingly complex motor  activities such as lifting its head and chest, reaching with its arms and hands, rolling  over, sitting, standing, and eventually walking and running. Although myelinization  proceeds very rapidly over the first few years of life (Herschkowitz, 2000), some areas  of the brain are not completely myelinated until the mid- to late teens or early adult- hood (Fischer & Rose, 1995; Kennedy et al., 2002; Rapoport et al., 2001; Sowell et al.,  1999). For example, the reticular formation and the frontal cortex—parts of the brain  that allow us to concentrate on a subject for lengthy periods—are not fully myelin- ated at puberty  (Tanner, 1990). This may be one reason that the attention spans of  infants, toddlers, and school-age children are much shorter than those of adolescents and adults.
• 
Frontal lobe (decision making)Motor cortex (body movements)Sensory cortex (body sensations)(perception)Parietal lobe Occipital lobe (vision)
emotive subcortical areas of the brain and the more regulatory prefrontal cortical areas In addition, as myelinization enhances the efficiency between the more primitive,  of the brain, an infant or child’s ability to process and respond to socially important  emotional input—such as the expressions of fear or disapproval on a parent’s face— may improve. As well, a child’s ability to monitor his or her own emotional reactions  increases (Herba & Phillips, 2004). For example, in a rush to grab the next present,  a 3- or 4-year-old may quickly discard a disappointing birthday gift, such as clothing,  whereas a 6-year-old may pause and give a polite “thank you” to Grandma, thus man- aging to mask disappointment and delay the gratification of exploring the next, more desirable  gift.  A  teenager  may  display  an  even  more  complex  inhibition  pattern—  smiling politely when a gift of unfashionable clothing is received from Grandma, and  scowling and protesting when a similar fashion faux pas is passed along from Mom (who should know better).
Broca’s area (speech production)cerebrum
the highest brain center; includes both hemispheres of the brain and the fibers that connect them. Temporal lobe (verbal memory) Spinal cord (transmission of neuralWernicke’s areaCerebellum (equilibrium,(understanding ofimpulses to and from the brain)coordination)spoken language)
Auditory cortex (hearing)
© Cengage Learning. 
corpus callosumthe bundle of neural fibers that connects the two hemispheres of the brain and transmits informa-tion from one hemisphere to the other.
Cerebral Lateralization
cerebral cortex
The highest brain center, the cerebrum,  consists of two halves (or hemispheres) con-covered by a cerebral cortex—an outer layer of gray matter that controls sensory  nected by a band of fibers called the corpus callosum.  Each of the hemispheres is and motor processes, perception, and intellectual functioning. Although identical  in appearance, the left and right cerebral hemispheres serve different functions and  control different areas of the body. The left cerebral hemisphere controls the right  side of the body; and, as illustrated in  Figure 5.6, it contains centers for speech, 
the outer layer of the brain’s cere-brum that is involved in voluntary body movements, perception, and higher intellectual functions such as learning, thinking, and speaking.
•  Figure 5.6  Lateral view of the left cerebral cortex and some of the functions that it controls. Although the cerebellum and spinal cord are not part of the cerebral cortex, they serve important functions of their own.
34524_ch05.indd   176 10/10/12   8:02 PMCHAPTER 5 
 lateralization also involves a preference for using one hand or one side of the body positive emotions. The right cerebral hemisphere, on the other hand, controls the hearing, verbal memory, decision making, language processing, and expression of  left side of the body and contains centers for processing visual-spatial information, more than the other. About 90 percent of adults rely on their right hands (or left  hemispheres) to write, eat, and perform other motor functions, whereas these same nonlinguistic sounds such as music, tactile (touch) sensations, and expressing neg-activities are under the control of the right hemisphere among most people who are ative  emotions  (Fox  et  al.,  1995).  Thus,  the 
cerebral lateralizationthe specialization of brain func-
tions in the left and the right cerebral hemispheres.
eralization may originate during the prenatal period and be well under way at birth (Kinsbourne, 1989). For example, about two-thirds of all fetuses end up positioned When do the two cerebral hemispheres begin to become lateralized? Brain lat- in the womb with their right ears facing outward, and it is thought that this gives  them a right ear advantage and illustrates the left hemisphere’s specialization in 
hood we come to rely more and more on one particular hemisphere or the other However, the brain is not completely specialized at birth; throughout child-to serve particular functions. Consider, for example, that even though left- or right- handedness is apparent early and is reasonably well established by age 2, lateral 
show a remarkable ability to bounce back from traumatic brain injuries as neural cir-Because the immature brain is not completely specialized, young children often  cuits that might otherwise have been lost assume the functions of those that have died  (Kolb & Fantie, 1989; Rakic, 1991). Although adolescents and adults who suffer brain 
Development of the Brain During Adolescence
Through the ages, adults have noticed that when children reach the teenage years, they suddenly begin to ask hypothetical, “what if” questions and to ponder weighty abstrac-tions such as truth and justice. Are these changes in thinking tied to late developments in the brain?
34524_ch05.indd   177
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    177
brain  is  a lateralized  organ.  Cerebral left-handed. However, the fact that the brain is a lateralized organ does not mean  that each hemisphere is totally independent of the other; the corpus callosum, which  connects the hemispheres, plays an important role in integrating their respective functions.
language processing (Previc, 1991). From the first day of life, speech sounds stimu- late more electrical activity in the left side of the cerebral cortex than in the right  (Molfese, 1977). In addition, most newborns turn to the right rather than to the  left when they lie on their backs, and these same babies later tend to reach for   objects with their right hands (Kinsbourne, 1989). So it seems that the two cerebral  hemispheres may be biologically programmed to assume different functions and  have already begun to differentiate by the time a baby is born (Kinsbourne, 1989;  Witelson, 1987).
preferences become stronger with age. In one experiment, preschoolers and adoles- cents were asked to pick up a crayon, kick a ball, look into a small, opaque bottle,  and place an ear to a box to hear a sound. Only 32 percent of the preschoolers, but  more than half of the adolescents, showed a consistent lateral preference by rely- ing exclusively on one side of the body to perform all four tasks (Coren, Porac, &  Duncan, 1981).
damage often regain a substantial portion of the functions they have lost, especially  with proper therapy, their recoveries are rarely as rapid or as complete as those of  younger children (Kolb & Fantie, 1989). So the remarkable recuperative power of the human brain (that is, its plasticity) is greatest early in life, before cerebral lateralization is complete.
10/10/12   8:02 PM178    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
example, myelinization of the higher brain centers, which continues well into adoles-cence, not only may increase adolescents’ attention spans but also explains why they Many researchers now believe that they are (Case, 1992; Somsen et al., 1997). For  process information much faster than grade-school children (Kail, 1991; Rapoport et al., 
•  CONCEPT CHECK 5.1 Overview of Physical Development and Brain Development
and growth and the development of the brain by  answering Check your understanding of general trends in maturation the  following  questions.  Answers  to  objective  questions  appear in the Appendix.
Multiple Choice: question. Select the best alternative for each 
1. The fact that a newborn’s head is 70 percent of its adult size and a full half of its body length is best explained by which concept of development?
 a. The skeletal age trend
 b. The cephalocaudal trend
 c. The proximodistal trend
 d. The fontenelle trend
2. Which of the following body parts actually declines to adult levels later in adolescence? adult levels in childhood and then overshoots
 a. The head and brain
 b. The muscular system
 c. The lymphoid system
 d. The skeletal system
3. The basic unit of the brain and nervous system are the cells that receive and transmit neural impulses. These cells are called
 a. glia cells.
 b. neurons. not stimulated do not continue to function. This aspect of brain development is termed
 c. myelin.
 d. synapses.
4. evolved so that the infant brain can be highly Scientists believe that the human brain has  responsive to the effects of experience. The brain is thought to produce an excess of neurons and synapses so that it can be responsive to many different kinds of sensory and motor stimulation. This responsiveness also results in synaptic and neural degeneration when the neurons that are 
34524_ch05.indd   178
2001). Furthermore, we now know that the brain retains at least some of its plasticity well beyond puberty (Nelson & Bloom, 1997) and that reorganizations of the neural cir-cuitry of the prefrontal cortex, which is involved in such higher-level cognitive activities as strategic planning, continues until at least age 20 (Spreen, Risser, & Edgell, 1995; Stuss,  1992). In addition, brain volume increases through early to midadolescence and then  decreases during late adolescence, suggesting that some pubertal reorganizations may involve synaptic pruning (Kennedy et al., 2002; Rapoport et al., 2001). So, even though changes in the brain during adolescence are less dramatic than those earlier in life, it is likely that some of the cognitive advances that teenagers display become possible only  after their brains undergo a process of reorganization and specialization (Barry et al., 2002, 2005).
 a. plasticity.
b. myelinization.
c. cerebral cortexification.
d. cerebral lateralization.
5. Gretchen is having a baby. She learned that brain lateralization may occur during the prena-tal period and be well under way at birth. This understanding led her to fully expect the posi-tioning of her fetus when it was examined with ultrasound. Like two-thirds of all fetuses, her fetus was positioned in her womb
 a. with its left ear facing outward.
 b. with its right ear facing outward.
 c. with its ears facing upward.
 d. with its ears facing downward.
True or False: statements is true or false.Indicate whether each of the following 
6. (T)(F) At birth, an infant’s bones are very stiff and brittle and easy to break.
7. (T)(F) Individual neurons have the potential to serve any neural function, depending on where their migra-tion delivers them.
8. (T)(F) Very few neurons produced early in life die; in-stead, they are adapted for different functions in the nervous system.
9. (T)(F) Although the brain is lateralized at birth, lat-eral preferences continue to become stronger across age through adolescence.
Short Answer: Briefly answer the following question.
10. Explain the ways in which the development of the brain and nervous system help us to understand why babies are reflexive, “sensory-motor” beings at birth.
10/10/12   8:02 PMCHAPTER 5 
Motor Development
One of the more dramatic developments of the 1st year of life is the remarkable progress that infants make in controlling their movements and perfecting motor skills. Writers 
the brain and neck muscles have matured enough to permit most infants to reach the However, babies do not remain immobile for long. By the end of the 1st month, 
Basic Trends in Locomotor Development
The two fundamental “laws” that describe muscular development and myelinization 
TABLE 5.1 European American, Latino, and African American Children in the United States) Age Norms (in Months) for Important Motor Developments (Based on 
Skill
Lifts head 90° while lying on stomach
Rolls over
Sits propped up
Sits without support
Stands holding on
Crawls
Walks holding on
Plays pat-a-cake
Stands alone momentarily
Stands well alone
Walks well
Builds tower of two cubes
Walks up steps
Kicks ball forward
Sources: Bayley, 1993; Frankenburg et al., 1992.
34524_ch05.indd   179
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    179
have sometimes described newborns as “helpless babes”—a characterization that largely  stems from the neonate’s inability to move about on her own. Clearly, human infants are disadvantaged when compared with the young of some other species, who can fol-low their mothers to food (and then feed themselves) very soon after birth.
first milestone in locomotor development: lifting their chins while lying flat on their stomachs. Soon thereafter, children lift their chests as well, reach for objects, roll over,  and sit up if someone supports them. Investigators who have charted motor develop- ment over the first 2 years find that motor skills evolve in a definite sequence, which appears in Table 5.1. Although the ages at which these skills first appear vary consider-ably from child to child, infants who are quick to proceed through this motor sequence are not necessarily any brighter or otherwise advantaged, compared with those whose rates of motor development are average or slightly below average. Thus, even though  the age norms in Table 5.1 are a useful standard for gauging an infant’s progress as he  or she begins to sit, stand, and take those first tentative steps, a child’s rate of motor development really tells us very little about future developmental outcomes.
also hold true for motor development during the first few years. Motor development  proceeds in a cephalocaudal (head downward) direction, with activities involving the 
Month when 50% mastered the skillof infants have  Month when 90% mastered the skillof infants have  
2.2 3.2
2.8 4.7
2.9 4.2
5.5 7.8
5.8 10.0
7.0 9.0
9.2 12.7
9.3 15.0
9.8 13.0
11.5 13.9
12.1 14.3
13.8 19.0
17.0 22.0
20.0 24.0
10/10/12   8:02 PM180    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
tivities involving the trunk and shoulders appearing before those involving the hands tremities. At the same time, development is proximodistal (center outward), with ac-head, neck, and upper extremities preceding those involving the legs and lower ex- and fingers. The kicking movements displayed by infants during the first few months 
briefly consider three possibilities: the maturational viewpoint, the experiential (or practice) whole of development) as a product of a complex transaction among the child’s physical How do we explain the sequencing and timing of early motor development? Let’s  capabilities, goals, and the experiences he has had (Kenrick, 2001; Thelen, 1995).hypothesis, and a newer dynamical systems theory that views motor development (and the 
The Maturational Viewpoint
The maturational viewpoint (Shirley, 1933) describes motor development as the un- folding of a genetically programmed sequence of events in which the nerves and mus-
cross-cultural research. Despite their very different early experiences, infants from around One clue that maturation plays a prominent role in motor development comes from  the world progress through roughly the same sequence of motor milestones. In addition, 
The Experiential (or Practice) Hypothesis
Although no one denies that maturation contributes to motor development, pro- ponents of the experiential viewpoint believe that opportunities to practice motor 
34524_ch05.indd   180
present a problem for the cephalocaudal perspective and are usually dismissed as  unintentional movements generated by the central nervous system (Lamb & Yang,  2000). However, Galloway and Thelen (2004) present evidence that contradicts the  “cephalocaudal rule.” First they point to evidence demonstrating that infants alter  the pattern of their leg movements when rewarded. For example, infants change  from alternating leg kicks to simultaneous kicks (Thelen, 1994), as well as from flexed  leg movements to extended leg movements (Angulo-Kinzler, 2001; Angulo-Kinzler,  Ulrich, & Thelen, 2002). They note that even Piaget (1952) noticed that his son re- peated leg kicks that shook a toy. Finally, Galloway and Thelen (2004) presented six  infants with toys at both foot and hand level. The infants first made contact with the  toy at around 12 weeks and did so by lifting a leg to touch the toy. First contact with  hands was made at around 16 weeks, much later than the intentional foot contact.  Extended contact with their feet also preceded extended contact with their hands.  Galloway and Thelen suggest that the structure of the hip joint may contribute to  infants’ early ability to control their legs because the hip joint is more stable and con- strained than the shoulder joint. Therefore, the amount of motion to be controlled  is much smaller for the hip joint than for the shoulder joint. Control of the shoulder  joint may call for much more experience, practice, and activity to master. Infants thus  are able to coordinate hip movement earlier than shoulder movement, contradicting  the cephalocaudal rule of thumb.
cles mature in a downward and outward direction. As a result, children gradually gain more control over the lower and peripheral parts of their bodies, displaying motor skills in the sequence shown in Table 5.1.
early studies in which one identical twin was allowed to practice motor skills (such as climbing stairs or stacking blocks) while the co-twin was denied these experiences sug-gested that practice had little effect on motor development: when finally allowed to per- form, the unpracticed twin soon matched the skills of the co-twin who had had many opportunities to practice (Gesell & Thompson, 1929; McGraw, 1935). Taken together, these findings seemed to imply that maturation underlies motor development and that practice merely allows a child to perfect those skills that maturation has made possible.
skills are also important. Consider what Wayne Dennis (1960) found when he stud- ied two groups of institutionalized orphans in Iran who had spent most of their first 
10/10/12   8:02 PMCHAPTER 5 
Blend Images/Alamy 
Toddler aptly describes 1–2 year olds who often lose their  balance when trying to walk.
infants in England with that of black infants whose families emigrated to England from Similarly, Brian Hopkins (1991) has compared the motor development of white 
Philip Dovetailing Zelazo  and nicely his with associates the  cross-cultural (1972,  1993) work with are North experiments American  infants. conducted 
ture hasten motor development? Esther Thelen’s (1986; Thelen & Fisher, 1982) view Why might having one’s limbs stretched or being held (or sat) in an upright pos-
34524_ch05.indd   181
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    181
fants were never placed in a sitting position, were rarely 2 years lying flat on their backs in their cribs. These in- played with, and were even fed in their cribs with their bottles  propped  on  pillows.  Was  their  motor  develop- ment affected by these depriving early experiences? In- deed it was! None of the 1- to 2-year-olds could walk,  and less than half of them could even sit unaided. In fact,  only 15 percent of the 3- to 4-year-olds could walk well  alone! So Dennis concluded that maturation is necessary  but not sufficient for the development of motor skills. In  other words, infants who are physically capable of sit- ting, crawling, or walking will not be very proficient at  these activities unless they have opportunities to practice them.
velopment prising that Kipsigi infants sit unassisted about 5 weeks Not only does a lack of practice inhibit motor de-but  cross-cultural  research  illustrates  that  earlier a variety of enriching experiences can even accelerate and  walk  unaided  about  a  month  earlier  than  Western infants do.the process. Cross-cultural studies tell us that the ages at  which  infants  attain  major  motor  milestones  are  heavily influenced by parenting practices. The Kipsigis  of Kenya, for example, work to promote motor skills.  By their 8th week, infants are already practicing their  “walking”  as  parents  grasp  them  by  the  armpits  and  propel them forward. Also, throughout their first few  months, infants are seated in shallow holes, dug so that  the sides support their backs and maintain an upright  posture. Given these experiences, it is perhaps not sur-
Jamaica. As in several other comparisons between black and white infants, the black infants displayed such important motor skills as sitting, crawling, and walking at earlier ages. Do these findings reflect genetic differences between blacks and whites? Probably  not, because black babies were likely to acquire motor skills early only if their mothers  had followed traditional Jamaican routines for handling infants and nurturing motor  development. These routines include massaging infants, stretching their limbs, and holding them by the arms while gently shaking them up and down. Jamaican mothers expect early motor development, work to promote it, and get it.
Zelazo by  found that 2- to 8-week-old babies who were regularly held in an upright posture and  encouraged to practice their stepping reflex showed a strengthening of this response  (which usually disappears early in life). They also walked at an earlier age than did in-fants in a control group who did not receive this training.
is that babies who are often placed in an upright position develop strength in the neck,  trunk, and legs (an acceleration of muscular growth), which, in turn, promotes the  early development of such motor skills as standing and walking. So it seems that both  maturation and experience are important contributors to motor development. Matu- ration does place some limits on the age at which the child will first be capable of 
10/10/12   8:02 PM182    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
forms of practice may influence the age at which important maturational capabilities sitting, standing, and walking. Yet experiences such as upright posturing and various are achieved and translated into action.
Motor Skills as Dynamic, Goal-Directed Systems
Although they would certainly agree that both maturation and experience con-tribute  to  motor  development,  proponents  of  an  exciting  new  perspective—  dynamical  systems  theory—differ  from  earlier  theorists.  They  do  not  view 
SW Productions/Stockbyte/Getty Images
According to dynamical systems theory, new motor skills emerge as curious infants reorganize their existing capabilities in order to achieve important objectives.
field (1989) learned in studying infants’ emerging ability to crawl. Goldfield found straightforward answer: Infants hope to acquire and perfect new motor skills that lier theories that did not address this issue, the dynamical systems theory offers a But why would infants work so hard to acquire new motor skills? Unlike ear- will help them to get to interesting objects they hope to explore or to accomplish that 7- to 8-month-old infants began to crawl on their hands and knees only after 
dynamical systems theorya theory that views motor skills 
as active reorganizations of pre-viously mastered capabilities that are undertaken to find more effective ways of exploring the environment or satisfying other objectives.
tor milestones? Partly because of their human maturational programming, which sets Why, then, do all infants proceed through the same general sequence of locomo- the stage for various accomplishments, and partly because each successive motor skill 
earlier theories had assumed. Though maturation plays a very important role, the basic In sum, the development of motor skills is far more interesting and complex than  motor skills of the first 2 years do not simply unfold as part of nature’s grand plan. 
34524_ch05.indd   182
motor skills as genetically programmed responses that simply “unfold” as dictated  by maturation and opportunities to practice. Instead, they view each new skill as a  construction that emerges as infants actively reorganize existing motor capabilities  into new and more complex action systems. At first, these new motor configu- rations are likely to be tentative, inefficient, and uncoordinated. New walkers,  for example, spend a fair amount of time on their backsides and are not called  “toddlers” for nothing. But over a period of time, these new motor patterns are  modified and refined until all components mesh and become smooth, coordinated  actions such as bouncing, crawling, walking, running, and jumping (Thelen, 1995;  Whitall & Getchell, 1995).
other goals they may have in mind (Thelen, 1995). Consider what Eugene Gold-they (1) regularly turned and raised their heads toward interesting sights and sounds  in the environment, (2) had developed a distinct hand/arm preference when reach- ing for such stimuli, and (3) had begun to thrust (kick) with the leg opposite to the  outstretched arm. Apparently, visual orientation motivates the infant to approach  interesting stimuli she can’t reach, reaching steers the body in the right direction, and  kicking with the opposite leg propels the body forward. So, far from being a prepro- grammed skill that simply unfolds according to a maturational plan, crawling (and  virtually all other motor skills) actually represents an active and intricate reorganiza- tion of several existing capabilities that is undertaken by a curious, active infant who has  a particular goal in mind.
must necessarily build on specific component activities that have developed earlier.  How does experience fit in? According to the dynamical systems theory, a real world  of interesting objects and events provides infants with many reasons to want to reach  out or to sit up, crawl, walk, and run—that is, with purposes and motives that might be  served by actively reorganizing their existing skills into new and more complex action  systems (Adolph, Vereijken, & Denny, 1998). Of course, no two infants have exactly  the same set of experiences (or goals), which may help explain why each infant coor- dinates the component activities of an emerging motor skill in a slightly different way (Thelen et al., 1993).
Rather, they emerge largely because goal-driven infants are constantly recombining ac-tions they can perform into new and more complex action systems that will help them achieve their objectives.
10/10/12   8:02 PMCHAPTER 5  Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    183
Fine Motor Development
Two other aspects of motor development play especially important roles in helping (or hand) skills.infants to explore and adapt to their surroundings: voluntary reaching and manipulatory 
Development of Voluntary Reaching
An infant’s ability to reach out and manipulate objects changes dramatically over the more than uncoordinated swipes at objects in the visual field. Prereaching is truly  a hit-or-miss proposition (Bower, 1982). By 2 months of age, infants’ reaching and 1st year. Recall that newborns come equipped with a grasping reflex. They are also  inclined to reach for things, although these primitive thrusts (or prereaches) are little grasping skills may even seem to deteriorate: the reflexive palmar grasp disappears  and prereaching occurs much less often (Bower, 1982). However, these apparent re- gressions set the stage for the appearance of voluntary reaching. Babies 3 months of  age and older display this new competency as they extend their arms and make in- flight corrections, gradually improving in accuracy until they can reliably grasp their  objectives (Hofsten, 1984; Thelen et al., 1993). However, infants clearly differ in how  they reach for objects. Some infants will flap their arms at first and must learn to  dampen their enthusiasm, whereas others start off reaching tentatively and will soon learn that they must supply more power to grasp their objectives (Thelen et al., 1993).  So, here again, we see that reaching is a motor skill that does not simply “unfold”; instead, babies reach in different ways and take their own unique pathways to refining  this important skill.
Development of Manipulatory Skills
Once an infant is able to sit well and to reach inward, across his body, at about 4 to may be the primary method by which 4- to 6-month-olds gain information developed: the reflexive palmar grasp has already disappeared by this age, about objects, for their unimanual (one-handed) grasping skills are poorly and the ulnar grasp that replaces it is itself a rather clumsy, clawlike grip  5 months, he begins to grasp interesting objects with both hands and his exploratory activities forever change. Rather than merely batting or palming objects, he is now apt  to transfer them from hand to hand or to hold them with one hand and finger them  with the other (Rochat, 1989; Rochat & Goubet, 1995). Indeed, this fingering activity that permits little tactile exploration of objects by touch.
ulnar graspan early manipulatory skill in 
which an infant grasps objects by pressing the fingers against the palm.
During the latter half of the 1st year, fingering skills improve and infants become much more proficient at tailoring all their ex-scooted rather than banged, spongy objects are squeezed rather vestigating (Palmer, 1989). Now, wheeled toys are likely to be than scooted, and so on. The next major step in the growth of ploratory activities to the properties of the objects they are in-verson, 1931). This pincer grasp transforms the child from a their thumbs and forefingers to lift and explore objects (Hal-hand skills occurs near the end of the 1st year as infants use little fumbler into a skillful manipulator who may soon begin  to capture crawling bugs and to turn knobs and dials, thereby  discovering that he or she can use his newly acquired hand  skills to produce any number of interesting results.
pincer graspa grasp in which the thumb is 
used in opposition to the fingers, enabling an infant to become more dexterous at lifting and fon-dling objects.
The pincer grasp is a crucial motor milestone that under-lies the development of many coordinated manual activities. ficient with their hands. At 16 months of age, they can scribble with a crayon; and by the end of the 2nd year, they can copy a Throughout the 2nd year, infants become much more pro-
Bruce Plotkin / The Image Works
34524_ch05.indd   183 10/10/12   8:02 PM184    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
simple horizontal or vertical line and even build towers of five or more blocks. What is happening is quite consistent with the dynamical systems theory: infants are gain- ing control over simple movements and then integrating these skills into increasingly 
Psychological Implications of Early Motor Development
Life changes dramatically for both parents and infants once a baby is able to reach out and grasp interesting objects, especially after he or she can crawl or walk to explore these also permit such pleasurable forms of social interaction as pat-a-cake, chase, and hide-and-seek.treasures. Suddenly, parents find they have to child-proof their homes, limit access to 
Michelle D. Bridwell / PhotoEdit 
As infants swing back and forth they experience changes in optical flow, leading to a better understanding of distance relationships.
34524_ch05.indd   184
complex, coordinated systems (Fentress & McLeod, 1986). Despite this ability, even  2- to 3-year-olds are not very good at catching and throwing a ball, cutting food with  utensils, or drawing within the lines of their coloring books. These skills will emerge  later in childhood as the muscles mature and children become more proficient at  using visual information to help them coordinate their actions.
certain areas, or else run the risk of experiencing a seemingly endless string of disasters including torn books, overturned vases, unraveled rolls of toilet paper, and irritated pets whose tails the little explorer has pulled. Placing limits on explorations often precipitates  conflicts and a “testing of the wills” between infants and their parents (Biringen et al.,  1995). Nevertheless, parents are often thrilled by their infant’s emerging motor skills,  which not only provide clear evidence that development is proceeding normally, but 
increasing control over bodily movements has other important Aside from the entertainment value it provides, an infant’s cognitive  and  social  consequences.  Mobile  infants  may  feel  much bolder, for example, about meeting people and seeking  challenges if they know that they can retreat to their caregiv-ers  for  comfort  should  they  feel  insecure  (Ainsworth,  1979). Achieving  various  motor  milestones  may  also  foster  percep-tual development. For example, crawlers (as well as noncrawl- ers who are made mobile with the aid of special walkers) are  better able to search for and find hidden objects than infants  of the same age who are not mobile (Kermoian & Campos, 1988).  The  self-produced  movement  of  crawling  and  walk- ing also makes infants more aware of optic flow, the perceived movement of objects in the visual field as well as the perceived  movements of the foreground and background in which the objects are imbedded. The relative movements of the observer  or the objects being observed influence such perceptions. For  example, an infant who is seated in a mechanical swing may  watch the family dog grow larger and then smaller in a rhyth-mic manner. However, if the swing winds down and the infant  is stationary, the synchronized optic flow of the dog ceases.  Now that the swing has stopped its anxiety-producing move- ment, the dog may wish to investigate the infant. As the dog approaches the stationary infant and swing, the dog appears to  grow bigger. The pattern of optic flow generated by the dog  moving toward the infant is quite different from the pattern  generated by the motion of the infant seated in the activated  mechanical swing. The infant will experience yet a third pat- tern of optical flow if, while the parents are preoccupied, big brother releases her from the swing and allows her to approach 
10/10/12   8:03 PMCHAPTER 5 
previous experience with big brother’s infancy was traumatic. Then the crawling infant the dog unsupervised. The dog expands to fill the field completely—unless the dog’s 
himself in space, improve his posture, and cause him to crawl or walk more efficiently So, optic flow and an infant’s gradual understanding of it help the child to orient 
Beyond Infancy: Motor Development in Childhood and Adolescence
The term toddler aptly describes most 1- to 2-year-olds, who often fall down or trip over stationary objects when they try to get somewhere in a hurry. But as children mature, 
higher, and throw a ball a little farther (Herkowitz, 1978; Keough & Sugden, 1985). With each passing year, school-age children can run a little faster, jump a little 
improving At the same time, eye–hand coordination and control of the small muscles are rapidly,  so  children  can  make  more  sophisticated  use  of  their  hands. 
Boys and girls are nearly equal in physical abilities until puberty, when boys continue to improve on tests of large-muscle activities, whereas girls’ skills level off or decline 
34524_ch05.indd   185
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    185
will perceive the dog as constant in size, as the background and foreground change (the dog maintains a safe distance, as it leads the infant all over the house).
(Higgins, Campos, & Kermoian, 1996). Also, crawling and walking both contribute to an understanding of distance relationships and a healthy fear of heights (Adolph,  Eppler, & Gibson, 1993; Campos, Bertenthal, & Kermoian, 1992). Experienced crawlers and ex- perienced walkers are better able to use landmarks to find their way than infants who  have just begun to crawl or to walk—that is, locomotion influences spatial memory  (Clearfield, 2004). So, once again, we see that human development is a holistic enter-prise: changes in motor skills have clear implications for other aspects of development.
their locomotor skills increase by leaps and bounds. By age 3, children can walk or run in a straight line and leap off the floor with both feet, although they can only clear very  small (8- to 10-inch) objects in a single bound and cannot easily turn or stop quickly  while running. Four-year-olds can skip, hop on one foot, catch a large ball with both hands, and run much farther and faster than they could 1 year earlier (Corbin, 1973). By  age 5, children are becoming rather graceful: like adults, they pump their arms when  they run and their balance has improved to the point that some of them can learn  to ride a bicycle. Despite (or perhaps because of) the rapid progress they are making,  young children often overestimate the physical feats they can perform, and the bolder or less inhibited ones are likely to be somewhat accident prone, ending up with bruises, burns, cuts, scrapes, and an assortment of other injuries (Schwebel & Plumert, 1999).
The reasons that children are improving at these large-muscle activities is that they are growing larger and stronger, and are also fine-tuning their motor skills. Young children throw only with the arm, whereas adolescents are usually able to coordinate shoulder, arm, and leg movements to put the force of their bodies behind their throws. So, older  children and adolescents can throw farther than younger children can, not solely be-cause they are bigger and stronger, but because they also use more refined and efficient techniques of movement (Gallahue, 1989).
Three-year-olds find it difficult to button their shirts, tie their shoes, or copy simple designs. By age 5, children can accomplish all of these feats and can even cut a straight  line with scissors or copy letters and numbers with a crayon. By age 8 or 9, they  can use household tools such as screwdrivers and have become skilled performers at  games such as jacks and Nintendo that require hand–eye coordination. Finally, older  children display quicker reaction times than younger children (Williams et al., 1999),  which helps explain why they usually beat younger playmates at “action” games such  as dodgeball or Ping-Pong.
(Thomas & French, 1985). These sex differences are, in part, attributable to biology: ado-lescent boys have more muscle and less fat than adolescent girls and might be expected 
10/10/12   8:03 PM186    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
to outperform them on tests of physical strength (Tanner, 1990). Yet biological develop-ments do not account for all the difference in large-muscle performance between boys  and girls (Smoll & Schutz, 1990), nor do they adequately explain the declining perfor-
apparent decline in large-muscle performance over time. Furthermore, as gender roles There is clearly an element of truth to this notion in that female athletes show no have changed in the past few decades, female athletes have been steadily improving 
physically active playmoderate to vigorous play activi-
ties such as running, jumping, climbing, play fighting, or game playing that raise a child’s meta-bolic rate far above resting levels.
FOCUS ON RESEARCH Sports Participation and Self-Esteem Among Adolescent Females
Recently, have  begun  to developmentalists consider  the benefits  of  physically  active play,  speculating that it serves as  a  mechanism  for  building muscle strength and endurance and possibly for reducing levels of fat in children’s growing bod-ies (Pellegrini & Smith, 1998). Physically  active  play  typically  peaks in early to middle child-hood  and  declines  thereafter. This reduction in vigorous phys- ical activity is much more appar-ent for girls than for boys, which undoubtedly helps explain the 
Smiley N. Pool/Dallas Morning News/Corbis
come much more supportive of one kind of physical activity for girls—participation in competitive and noncompetitive sports. Interestingly, over the past 40 years, our society has be-Title IX, a federal law passed in 1972 that bans discrimination on  the  basis  of  gender  in  federally  funded  institutions,  has  resulted in dramatic increases in funding for female athletic programs at the college level. High school programs for female athletes have expanded greatly over the same period, and even private  corporations  such  as  Nike  have  entered  the  playing 
feelings  of  physical  compe-tence,  (3)  body  images,  and  (4) possession of such desir-able  “masculine”  attributes as assertiveness and a healthy sense of competition.
Richman and David Shaffer (2000) constructed an elaborate Is there any basis for the latter claim? To find out, Erin questionnaire to measure both the depth and breadth of female  freshman college students’ participation in formal and infor-mal sporting activities during their high school years. These re-searchers also asked their participants to complete instruments  designed to assess their current (1) levels of self-esteem, (2) 
34524_ch05.indd   186
mance of many girls, who continue to grow taller and heavier between ages 12 and 17. The apparent physical decline of adolescent girls may be a product of gender-role social- ization: with their widening hips and developing breasts, girls are often encouraged to become less tomboyish and more interested in traditionally feminine (and less athletic) activities (Blakemore, Berenbaum, & Liben, 2008; Herkowitz, 1978).
their performances, and the male/female gap in physical performance has narrowed dramatically  (Dyer,  1977;  Whipp  &  Ward,  1992).  So  it  seems  that  adolescent  girls  would almost certainly continue to improve on tests of large-muscle activity should 
decline in large-muscle strength often seen among girls during the adolescent years.
participated to a greater extent in sports enjoyed higher levels support The results provided some for  the  claims  made in  the  of general self-worth as college students. Further analysis re-Nike  ad  campaign. First,  there  was  a  clear  rela-tion  between vealed that the apparently beneficial effect of earlier sporting girls’  partici-pation  in  sports  during  high school  and  their activities later on self-girls’ esteem: girls who had earlier college  self-esteem  reflected  the  findings  that (1) sports participation was associated with increases in  perceived physical competencies, development of a more fa-vorable  body  image,  and  acquisition  of  desirable  masculine  attributes (such as assertiveness); and (2) all these develop-ments, in turn, were positively correlated with (and apparently fostered) participants’ college self-esteem.
field with an ad campaign featuring young girls pleading, “If you let me play sports . . . ,” and then citing various health and social benefits that can result from sports participation. One of  the benefits to which the ads allude is an enhanced sense of self-worth (or self-esteem) among female athletes.
In sum, it appears that girls’ participation in sporting ac-tivities during the adolescent years may well contribute to an  enhanced sense of self-worth—but this was true only to the extent that sporting activities fostered physical competencies,  more favorable body images, and such desirable personal at-tributes as assertiveness (see also Ackerman, 2002; Lehman & Joerner, 2005; Malcom, 2003; Shakib, 2003). These findings imply that gym classes and formal team sports might be more beneficial to a larger number of girls if educators and coaches  were to emphasize and devise ways to measure and illustrate the physical gains and psychological benefits of formal and in-formal sporting activities, while concentrating less on the out-comes of competitive sports and/or the physical deficiencies of the less athletically competent girls under their tutelage.
10/10/12   8:03 PMCHAPTER 5 
ture, they may experience important psychological benefits as well by remaining physi-they choose to remain physically active. And as we see in the Focus on Research fea-cally active throughout the teenage years.
Puberty: The Physical Transition from Child to Adult
word pubertas, meaning “to grow hairy”), the point in life when an individual reaches The onset of adolescence is heralded by two significant changes in physical develop- sexual maturity (Mustanski 
adolescent growth spurtthe rapid increase in physical 
growth that marks the beginning of adolescence.
pubertythe point at which a person reaches sexual maturity and is physically capable of fathering or conceiving a child.
The Adolescent Growth Spurt
The term growth spurt describes the rapid acceleration in height and weight that marks the beginning of adolescence (a growth rate that is faster than any growth rate since 
ance during the adolescent growth spurt. Perhaps the most noticeable changes are the In addition to growing taller and heavier, the body assumes an adultlike appear-
Sexual Maturation
Maturation of the reproductive system occurs at roughly the same time as the adoles-
Sexual Development in Girls
For most girls, sexual maturation begins at about age 9 to 11 as fatty tissue accumu-
begin to mature. Internally, the vagina becomes larger, and the walls of the uterus As a girl enters her growth spurt, the breasts grow rapidly and the sex organs 
34524_ch05.indd   187
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    187
ment. First, children change dramatically in size and shape as they enter the adolescent et  al.,  2004)  and  becomes  capable  of producing  a  child growth spurt (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Second, they also reach puberty (from the Latin (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005).
the children were infants) (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Girls typically enter the growth spurt  by age 10.5, reach a peak growth rate by age 12 (about 1.3 years before menarche), and return to a slower rate of growth by age 13 to 13.5 (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005; Tanner,  1990). Most girls gain only about 2.5 centimeters in height after menarche (Grumbach  & Styne, 2003). Boys lag behind girls by 2 to 3 years: they typically begin their growth  spurt by age 13, peak at age 14 (midpuberty), and return to a more gradual rate of  growth by age 16. Because girls mature much earlier than boys, it is not at all uncom- mon for females to be the tallest two or three students in a middle school classroom. By the end of the growth spurt, boys have increased 28 to 31 centimeters in height and girls 27.5 to 29 centimeters (Abbassi, 1998).
appearance of breasts and a widening of the hips for girls, and a broadening of the  shoulders for boys. Facial features also assume adult proportions as the forehead pro-trudes, the nose and jaw become more prominent, and the lips enlarge.
cent growth spurt and follows a predictable sequence for girls and boys.
lates around their nipples, forming small “breast buds” (Herman-Giddens et al., 1997; Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Full breast development, which takes about 3 to 4 years, finishes around age 14 (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Usually pubic hair begins to appear a little later,  although as many as one-third of all girls develop some pubic hair before their breasts begin to develop (Tanner, 1990).
develop a powerful set of muscles that may one day be used to accommodate a fetus  during pregnancy and to push it through the cervix and vagina during the birth pro-cess. Externally, the mons pubis (the soft tissue covering the pubic bone), the labia (the  fleshy lips surrounding the vaginal opening), and the clitoris all increase in size and  become more sensitive to touch (Tanner, 1990).
10/10/12   8:03 PM188    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
menarche of her first menstruation (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Though it is generally assumed that a girl becomes fertile at menarche, young girls often menstruate without ovulating and At about age 12, the average girl in Western societies reaches menarche—the time  may remain unable to reproduce for 12 to 18 months after menarche (Pinyerd & Zipf, the first occurrence of 
menstruation.
Sexual Development in Boys
For boys, sexual maturation begins at about 10 to 13 (9.5 to 13.5) with an enlargement of the testes (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). The growth of the testes is often accompanied or  soon followed by the appearance of unpigmented pubic hair (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). 
then on the sides of the face, and finally on the chin and jawline (Mustanski et al., 2004; Somewhat later, boys begin to sprout facial hair, first at the corners of the upper lip,  Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Body hair also grows on the arms and legs, although signs of a 
Individual Differences in Physical and Sexual Maturation
So  far,  we  have  been  describing  developmental  norms,  or  the  average  ages  when   adolescent changes take place. There are many individual differences in the timing of 
Secular Trends—Are We Maturing Earlier?
About 25 years ago, women in one family were surprised when a sixth-grader began to menstruate shortly after her 12th birthday. The inevitable comparisons soon began, as the girl learned that neither of her great-grandmothers had reached this milestone until 
her great-grandmother was born, the average age of first menstruation was 14 to 15. As it turns out, this young woman was simply telling it like it is. In 1900, when By 1950, most girls were reaching menarche between 13½ and 14, and recent norms 
George Doyle & Ciaran Griffin/Photos.comIn early adolescence, girls are maturing more rapidly than boys.
34524_ch05.indd   188
2005; Tanner, 1978). Anovulatory menstrual cycles (menstruation without ovulation) are often associated with irregular and painful periods. After 1 to 2 years, cycles become  ovulatory, more regular, and less painful (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). In the year following menarche, female sexual development concludes as the breasts complete their develop-ment and axillary (underarm) hair appears (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Hair also appears on the arms, legs, and, to a lesser degree, on the face (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005).
As the testes grow, the scrotum also grows; it thins and darkens, and descends to its  pendulous adult position (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). Meanwhile, the penis lengthens and  widens. At about age 13 to 14.5, sperm production begins (Pinyerd & Zipf, 2005). By the time the penis is fully developed at age 14.5 to 15, most boys will have reached pu-berty and are now capable of fathering a child (Tanner, 1990).
hairy chest may not appear until the late teens or early 20s, if at all. Another hallmark of male sexual maturity is a lowering of the voice as the larynx grows and the vocal cords lengthen. In fact, many men may laugh (years later) about hearing their voices “crack- ing” up and down between a squeaky soprano and a deep baritone, sometimes within a single sentence.
physical and sexual maturation. An early-maturing girl who develops breast buds at  age 8, starts her growth spurt at age 9.5, and reaches menarche at age 10.5 may nearly complete her growth and pubertal development before the late-developing girls in her  class have even begun. Individual differences among boys are at least as great: some  boys reach sexual maturity by age 12.5 and are as tall as they will ever be by age 13, whereas others begin growing later and do not reach puberty until their late teens. This perfectly normal biological variation may be observed in any middle school classroom, where one will find a wide assortment of bodies, ranging from those that are very child-like to those that are quite adultlike.
age 15 and that her grandmother had been nearly 14 and her mother 13. At this point, the girl casually replied, “Big deal! Lots of girls in my class have got their periods.”
have dropped even further, to age 12.5 (Tanner, 1990). Today, the definition of “early” 
10/10/12   8:03 PMCHAPTER 5 
boys (Saenger, 2003). This secular trend toward earlier maturation started more than puberty remains puberty begun before 8 years of age for girls and 9 years of age for 
secular trend a trend in industrialized societ-
ies toward earlier maturation and greater body size now than in the past.
•  CONCEPT CHECK 5.2 Motor Development and Puberty
velopmental changes associated with puberty by  answering Check your understanding of motor development and de- the  following  questions.  Answers  to  objective  questions  appear in the Appendix.
True or False: statements is true or false.Indicate whether each of the following 
1. (T)(F) Infants who proceed through stages of motor development more quickly than the average are likely to be more intelligent later in childhood than infants who are average or  behind average.
2. (T)(F) Infants who are mobile (can crawl or walk eas-ily) are less fearful about meeting strangers because they know they can easily escape to their caregiv-ers if they should begin to feel  insecure in the new situation.
3. (T)(F) Generally, girls reach sexual maturity  earlier than boys.
4. (T)(F) Girls become capable of having children as soon as they have their first menstruation.
5. (T)(F) The secular trend refers to the fact that chil-dren today are reaching sexual maturity at later ages than their grandparents and great-grandparents.
Multiple Choice: question. Select the best alternative for each 
6. Zach has a young son, about 6 months old. Zach believes that helping his son practice motor skills will help his son achieve motor skills alone earlier than if he did not help his son practice. Consequently, when Zach plays with his son he helps his son practice sitting 
a. The maturational viewpoint
b. The experiential viewpoint
c. The developmental sequence viewpoint
d. The dynamical systems viewpoint
34524_ch05.indd   189
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    189
100 years ago in the industrialized nations of the world, where it has now leveled off, and it has begun happening in the more prosperous nonindustrialized countries as well  (Coleman & Coleman, 2002). In addition, people in industrialized nations have been  growing taller and heavier over the past century. What explains these secular trends?  Better nutrition and advances in medical care seem to be most responsible (Tanner,  1990). Today’s children are more likely than their parents or grandparents to reach their genetic potentials for maturation and growth because they are better fed and less likely to experience growth-retarding illnesses. Even within our own relatively affluent society, poorly nourished adolescents mature later than well-nourished ones. Girls who 
7. In a study of orphaned children who were con-fined to their cribs during their first 2 years of life, Dennis found that
a. maturation determined the age at which young toddlers could sit, crawl, and walk, regardless of their experiences.
b. experience determined the age at which young toddlers could sit, crawl, and walk, regardless of their maturational age.
c. maturation was necessary but not sufficient for the development of such motor skills as sitting, walking, and crawling.
d. experience was the determining factor, regardless of age, of when young toddlers could sit, crawl, and walk.
8. Boys and girls are nearly equal in physical abili-ties until puberty, when
a. girls continue to improve on tests of large-muscle activities, whereas boys’ skills level off or decline.
b. boys continue to improve on tests of large-muscle activities, whereas girls’ skills level off or decline.
c. boys and girls continue to improve on tests of large-muscle activities.
d. boys’ and girls’ skills level off or decline.
and walking and encourages his son’s efforts. Zach’s viewpoints about motor development are most closely aligned with which scientific view of motor development? 9. Which associated with the adolescent growth spurt?of the following is not one of the changes 
a. Girls and boys grow taller and heavier.
b. Girls and boys assume adult facial features as their foreheads protrude, and their noses and jaws become more prominent.
c. Girls and boys experience a widening of their hips.
d. Girls develop breasts and boys experience a broadening of their shoulders.
Short Answer: Briefly answer the following question.
10.  Explain the ways in which participation in sports may improve the self-esteem of young girls.
10/10/12   8:03 PM190    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
are tall and overweight as children tend to mature early (Graber et al., 1994), whereas many dancers, gymnasts, and other girls who engage regularly in strenuous physical  activity may begin menstruating very late or stop menstruating after they have begun (Hopwood et al., 1990). Here, then, are strong clues that nature and nurture interact to influence the timing of pubertal events.
Causes and Correlates of Physical Development
Although we have now charted the course of physical development from birth through  adolescence, we’ve touched only briefly on the factors that influence growth. What really causes children to grow in the first place? And why do their bodies change so dra-matically at adolescence, when growth accelerates? As we will see in the pages that fol- low, physical development results from a complex and continuous interplay between the forces of nature and nurture.
Biological Mechanisms
Clearly, biological factors play a major role in the growth process. Although children  do not all grow at the same rate, we have seen that the sequencing of both physical maturation and motor development is reasonably consistent from child to child. Appar- ently, these regular maturational sequences that all humans share are species-specific attributes—products of our common genetic heritage.
Effects of Individual Genotypes
Aside from our common genetic ties to the human race, we have each inherited a  unique combination of genes that influence our physical growth and development. For example, family studies clearly indicate that height is a heritable attribute: identical twins are much more similar in height than fraternal twins, whether the measurements  are taken during the 1st year of life, at 4 years of age, or in early adulthood (Tanner,  1990). Rate of maturation is also genetically influenced (Kaprio et al., 1995; Mustanski et al., 2004). Similar genetic influences hold for milestones in skeletal growth and even for the appearance of teeth in infants.
appears that our genes regulate the production of hormones, which have major effects How does genotype influence growth? We are not completely certain, although it  on physical growth and development.
Hormonal Influences: The Endocrinology of Growth
Hormones begin to influence development long before a child is born. As we learned  in Chapter 3, a male fetus assumes a malelike appearance because (1) a gene on his Y  chromosome triggers the development of testes, which (2) secrete a male hormone (testosterone) that is necessary for the development of a male reproductive system.
pituitary velopment of body cells. Growth hormone is released in small amounts several times “master gland” located at the base of the brain that triggers the release of hormones The most critical of the endocrine (hormone-secreting) glands is the pituitary, a a day. And GH is essential for normal growth and development as well. What, then, from all other endocrine glands. In addition to regulating the endocrine system, the triggers the adolescent growth spurt and other pubertal changes?pituitary produces a growth hormone (GH)  that stimulates the rapid growth and de-a “master gland” located at the 
base of the brain that regulates the endocrine glands and pro-duces growth hormone.
growth hormone (GH)the pituitary hormone that stimu-lates the rapid growth and devel-opment of body cells; primarily responsible for the adolescent growth spurt.
physical changes occur, pituitary secretions stimulate a girl’s ovaries to produce more cence far beyond what we knew only 20 to 25 years ago. Long before any noticeable Research (reviewed in Tanner, 1990) has clarified the endocrinology of adoles-
34524_ch05.indd   190 10/10/12   8:03 PMCHAPTER 5  Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    191
Pituitary GlandHypothalamusHypothalamus Maturation of female  reproductive organsBreast growthBroadening of hipsBody hairThyroxineThyroid Adrenal glandsAndrogens EstrogenGrowth hormone
General growth of  body tissuesDirects direction of maleTestosteroneTestesAdolescent growth  reproductive organs   spurt Ovaries   before birthMaturation of male  reproductive organsVoice changesFacial and body hairSecondary inﬂuence on   muscular development,  bone growth, and  broadening of shouldersEarly brain growthBone growth Muscular growthBone growth
Pituitary Gland
Thyroid Adrenal glands Testes Ovaries
Thyroxine Androgens Growth hormone Testosterone Estrogen
Early brain growth Muscular growthBone growth General growth of  body tissuesAdolescent growth  spurt Directs direction of male  reproductive organs   before birthMaturation of male  reproductive organsVoice changesFacial and body hairSecondary inﬂuence on   muscular development,  bone growth, andMaturation of female  broadening of shoulders  reproductive organsBreast growthBroadening of hipsBody hairBone growth
© Cengage Learning
•  Figure 5.7  Hormonal influences on physical development.
estrogen estrogen and a boy’s  secrete more GH. This increase in GH seems to be wholly responsible for the adoles-reach a critical level, the hypothalamus (a part of the brain) instructs the pituitary to testes to produce more testosterone.  Once these sex hormones  cent growth spurt in girls and is primarily responsible for boys’ growth spurt. As for sexual maturation, the female hormone estrogen triggers the growth of a girl’s breasts, uterus, vagina, pubic and underarm hair, and the widening of her hips. In boys, testos-terone is responsible for growth of the penis and prostate, voice changes, and the devel- opment of facial and body hair. And although GH may be the primary contributor to  the male growth spurt, testosterone exerts its own independent effects on the growth of a boy’s muscles, the broadening of his shoulders, and the extension of his backbone.  So it seems that adolescent boys experience larger growth spurts than adolescent girls  simply because testosterone promotes muscular and bone growth in ways that estro- gen does not. Finally, androgen secreted by adrenal glands plays a secondary role in promoting the maturation of muscles and bones in both sexes (Tanner, 1990).female sex hormone, produced by 
the ovaries, that is responsible for female sexual maturation.
testosteronemale sex hormone, produced by the testes, that is responsible for male sexual maturation.
 dramatic learned a great deal about how hormones affect human growth and development (see regulation of these hormonal influences remain unclear.Figure 5.7 for a brief review). However, the events responsible for the timing and What causes the pituitary to activate the endocrine glands and precipitate the physical  changes  of  adolescence?  No  one  can  say  for  sure.  So,  we  have 
Environmental Influences
Three kinds of environmental influence can have a major effect on physical growth and development: nutrition, illnesses, and the quality of care that children receive.
Nutrition
Diet is perhaps the most important environmental influence on human growth and  development. As you might expect, children who are inadequately nourished grow very slowly, if at all.
34524_ch05.indd   191 10/10/12   8:03 PM
• 192    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
Problems of Undernutrition.  severe, children usually recover from any growth deficits by growing much faster than normal once their diet becomes adequate. James Tanner (1990) views this catch-up If undernutrition is neither prolonged nor especially  growth as a basic principle of physical development. Presumably, children who have  experienced short-term growth deficits because of malnutrition grow very rapidly in order to regain (or catch up to) their genetically programmed growth trajectory.
catch-up growtha period of accelerated growth 
in which children who have  experienced growth deficits grow very rapidly to “catch up to” the growth trajectory that they are  genetically programmed to follow.
main relatively small in stature (Barrett & Frank, 1987; Tanner, 1990). These findings the first 5 years of life: brain growth may be seriously retarded and the child may re-However, prolonged undernutrition has a more serious impact, especially during  make sense when we recall that the first 5 years is a period when the brain normally  gains about 65 percent of its eventual adult weight and the body grows to nearly two-thirds of its adult height.
85 percent of all children under age 5 experience some form of undernutrition (Barrett In many of the developing countries of Africa, Asia, and Latin America, as many as  & Frank, 1987). When children are severely undernourished, they are likely to suffer from either of two nutritional diseases—marasmus or kwashiorkor—each of which has a slightly different cause.
marasmus easily occur if a mother is malnourished and does not have the resources to provide her Marasmus affects babies who get insufficient protein and too few calories, as can  child with a nutritious commercial substitute for mother’s milk. A victim of marasmus  becomes very frail and wrinkled in appearance as growth stops and the body tissues  begin to waste away. Even if these children survive, they remain small in stature and often suffer impaired social and intellectual development (Barrett & Frank, 1987).a growth-retarding disease affect-
ing infants who receive insuffi-cient protein and too few calories.
kwashiorkor the disease progresses, the child’s hair thins, the face, legs, and abdomen swell with Kwashiorkor affects children who get enough calories but little if any protein. As a growth-retarding disease affect- water, and severe skin lesions may develop. In many poor countries of the world, one of the few high-quality sources of protein readily available to children is mother’s milk. So  breast-fed  infants  do  not  ordinarily  suffer  from  marasmus  unless  their  mothers  are severely malnourished; however, they may develop kwashiorkor when they are weaned from the breast and denied their primary source of protein.
ing children who receive enough calories but little if any protein.
kwashiorkor. However, vitamin and mineral deficiencies affect large numbers of chil- protein/calorie In  Western  industrialized deficiencies  are countries, rarely the so  malnourished preschool  children as  to  develop who  do  experience marasmus  or dren in the United States, particularly African American and Hispanic children from  lower socioeconomic backgrounds (Pollitt, 1994). Especially common among infants  and toddlers are iron and zinc deficiencies that occur because rapid growth early in life requires more of these minerals than a young child’s diet normally provides. Thus, children whose diets are deficient in zinc grow very slowly (Pollitt et al., 1996).
vitamin and mineral deficiencya form of malnutrition in which 
the diet provides sufficient protein and calories but is lacking in one or more substances that promote normal growth.
iron deficiency anemia social interaction, but also retards their growth rates and is associated with poor perfor-only makes children inattentive and listless, thereby restricting their opportunities for Prolonged iron deficiency causes iron deficiency anemia,  a condition that not  mances on tests of motor skills and intellectual development.a listlessness caused by too 
little iron in the diet that makes children inattentive and may retard physical and intellectual development.
Problems of Overnutrition.  of poor nutrition that is increasing in Western societies and can have several long-Dietary excess (eating too much) is yet another form term consequences (Galuska et al., 1996). The most immediate effect of overnutrition is that children may become obese and face added risk of diabetes, high blood pressure,  and heart, liver, or kidney disease. Obese children may also find it difficult to make  friends with age-mates, who are apt to tease them about their size and shape. Indeed,  obese children are often among the least popular students in grade-school classrooms  (Sigelman, Miller, & Whitworth, 1986; Staffieri, 1967).
obesea medical term describing individ-
uals who are at least 20 percent above the ideal weight for their height, age, and sex.
34524_ch05.indd   192 10/10/12   8:03 PM
ner peers to be obese in later adolescence and adulthood (Cowley, 2001). Heredity defi-Obese grade-school children and adolescents are much more likely than their thin-nitely contributes to these trends (Stunkard et al., 1990). Yet, a genetic predisposition CHAPTER 5 
does not guarantee obesity. Highest levels of obesity are found among children who eat a high-fat diet and who do not get sufficient exercise to burn the calo-
© Stephen Morrison/epa/Corbis/Wire/Corbis
wise emaciated appearance are symptoms This child’s swollen stomach and other-of kwashiorkor. Without adequate protein in the diet, children with kwashiorkor are more susceptible to many diseases and may die from illnesses that well-nour-ished children can easily overcome.
Illnesses
show a growth spurt (catch-up growth) that makes up for the progress lost while he or such as measles, chicken pox, or even pneumonia have little if any effect on phys-Among children who are adequately nourished, common childhood illnesses 
erately to severely undernourished. A poor diet weakens the immune system, so that Yet, diseases are likely to permanently stunt the growth of children who are mod-
Emotional Stress and Lack of Affection
Finally,  otherwise  healthy  children  who  experience  too  much  stress  and  too  little 
nonorganic failure to thrivean infant growth disorder, caused  18 months of age. Babies who display it stop growing and appear to be wasting away, Nonorganic failure to thrive is a growth disorder that appears early, usually by 
by lack of attention and affection, that causes growth to slow dra-matically or stop.
34524_ch05.indd   193
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    193
ries they’ve consumed (Cowley, 2001; Fischer & Birch, 1995).
(Birch, 1990). Some parents use food to reinforce desirable behaviors (for exam-Bad eating habits that can lead to obesity are often established early in life ple, “Clean your room and you can have some ice cream”), or they bribe their  children to eat foods they do not want (“No dessert until you eat your peas”)  (Olvera-Ezzell, Power, & Cousins, 1990; Smith, 1997). Unfortunately, children may attach a special significance to eating that extends far beyond its role in re- ducing hunger if they are encouraged to view food as a reward. Moreover, use of high-fat desserts or snacks as a reward may convince young children that the healthier foods they are being “bribed” to eat must really be yucky stuff after all (Birch, Marlin, & Rotter, 1984).
In addition to their poor eating habits, obese children are less active than normal-weight peers. Of course, their inactivity may both contribute to obesity  (obese children burn fewer calories) and be a consequence of their overweight  condition. One strong clue that activity restriction contributes to obesity is  that the amount of time children spend in the sedentary activity of watch- ing television is one of the best predictors of future obesity (Cowley, 2001).   Television may also promote poor eating habits: not only do children tend  to snack while passively watching TV, but the foods they see advertised are mostly high-calorie products containing lots of fat and sugar and few  beneficial  nutrients (Tinsley, 1992).
she was sick (Tanner, 1990).ical growth and development. Major illnesses that keep a child in bed for weeks  may temporarily retard growth, but after recovering, the child will ordinarily 
childhood  diseases  strike  an  undernourished  child  sooner  and  harder  (Pollitt  et  al.,  1996). Not only does malnutrition increase one’s susceptibility to disease, but diseases  contribute to malnutrition by suppressing a child’s appetite and limiting the body’s ability to absorb and utilize nutrients (Pollitt, 1994). In developing countries where gas- trointestinal infections and upper respiratory illnesses are common, young school-age  children who have been relatively disease-free are already 1 to 2 inches taller and 3 to  5 pounds heavier on average than their more “sickly” peers (Martorell, 1980; Roland,  Cole, & Whitehead, 1977), and are outperforming them on a variety of cognitive tests as well (Pollitt, 1994).
 affection are likely to lag far behind their age-mates in physical growth and motor de- velopment. This failure-to-thrive syndrome may characterize as many as 6 percent of  preschool children in the United States and up to 5 percent of all patients admitted to pediatric hospitals (Lozoff, 1989).
in much the same way that malnourished infants with marasmus do. These infants do not have an obvious illness, and no other biological cause for their condition is apparent. 
10/10/12   8:03 PM194    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
tion is undoubtedly attributable to poor nutrition (Brockington, 1996; Lozoff, 1989). Of Affected babies often have trouble feeding and, in many cases, their growth retarda- course, a major question is, why would an otherwise healthy baby have trouble feeding?
ally apathetic and withdrawn, will often watch their caregivers closely, but are unlikely One clue comes from these babies’ behaviors around caregivers. They are gener- to smile or cuddle when they are picked up. Why? Because their caregivers are typically 
deprivation dwarfism tional deprivation and a lack of affection. It appears later, usually between 2 and 15 Deprivation dwarfism is a second growth-related disorder that stems from emo- years of age, and is characterized by small stature and dramatically reduced rates of a childhood growth disorder 
that is triggered by emotional deprivation and characterized by decreased production of GH, slow growth, and small stature.
are corrected by individual or family therapy, or if the affected child is placed with car-tion dwarfism are very good if the caregiving problems responsible for these disorders The prognoses for children affected by nonorganic failure to thrive and depriva- ing foster parents (Brockington, 1996). However, if nonorganic failure to thrive is not 
•  CONCEPT CHECK 5.3 Psychological Impacts of Puberty and Causes of Growth and Development
puberty as well as the causes and correlates of growth and Check your understanding of the psychological impacts of  development by answering the following questions. Answers appear in the Appendix.
True or False: true or false.Indicate whether the following statement is 
1. (T)(F) “Rites of passage” are rituals observed in many nonindustrialized countries that are used to mark the child’s puberty and transition from child to adolescent.
34524_ch05.indd   194
cool and aloof, impatient with them, and sometimes even physically abusive (Brocking-ton, 1996). So even though caregivers may offer enough food for those babies to thrive,  their impatience and hostility causes babies to withdraw and to become aloof to the point of feeding poorly and displaying few, if any, positive social responses.
growth, even though children who display this disorder do not look especially mal- nourished and usually receive adequate nutrition and physical care. What seems to  be lacking in their lives is a positive involvement with another person, namely with  their primary caregivers, who themselves are likely to be depressed by an unhappy  marriage, economic hardships, or some other personal problem (Brockington, 1996;  Roithmaier et al., 1988). It appears that deprivation dwarfs grow very slowly because their emotional deprivation depresses the endocrine system and inhibits the production  of growth hormone. Indeed, when these children are removed from their homes and begin to receive attention and affection, secretion of GH quickly resumes, and they dis-play catch-up growth, even when they eat the same diet on which they formerly failed to thrive (Brockington, 1996; Gardner, 1972).
identified and corrected in the first 2 years, or if the emotional neglect that underlies  deprivation dwarfism persists for several years, affected children may remain smaller than normal and display long-term emotional problems and intellectual deficiencies as well (Drotar, 1992; Lozoff, 1989).
Matching: ing nutritional deficits with Match the follow- their definitions. a.  a wasting away of body tissues caused by insuffi-cient protein and calories
b.  a disease marked by a swollen abdomen and  severe skin lesions caused by insufficient protein2. kwashiorkor
3. marasmus
4. iron deficiency anemia
5. overnutrition c.  a disease associated with diabetes, high blood pres-sure, and heart or kidney disease
d.  a disease that makes children listless and  inattentive, retards their growth, and causes them to score poorly on tests of intelligence
10/10/12   8:03 PMCHAPTER 5 
and responsive caregiving if they are to develop normally. Fortunately, there is hope for preventing these deprivation-related disorders if parents whose children are at risk can In sum, failure to thrive provides yet another indication that children require love 
Applying Developmental Themes to Physical Development
PassiveActive Before we close our discussion of physical development, let’s take a brief look at how 
own development both intentionally and through unconscious implications of his or Our first theme is that of the active child, or how the child participates in his or her 
expand the influence of the active child to include the environment in which the child is The interactions of nature and nurture in their effects on physical development 
tive and quantitative changes. We saw that babies may remain the same length for days Physical development across childhood and adolescence is marked by both qualita-
NatureNurture
Holistic 34524_ch05.indd   195
ContinuityDiscontinuity
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    195
be identified early, which they often can be. Even before giving birth, women whose  children may fail to thrive are more likely than other mothers to feel unloved by their  parents, to reject their own mothers as models, and to say their own childhoods were unhappy. Within days of giving birth, these mothers are already having more problems feeding and soothing their babies than are other mothers (Lozoff, 1989). Clearly, these  families need help and would almost certainly benefit from early interventions that teach parents how to be more sensitive and responsive caregivers.
our developmental themes are reflected in the various aspects of physical development,  including the development of the brain and body, the development of motor skills,  and puberty. Recall that our developmental themes include the active child, the inter-play of nature and nurture in development, qualitative and quantitative developmental changes, and the holistic nature of development.
her nature. One dramatic piece of evidence that the child is active in development is the fact that the child’s early experiences direct the synaptic pruning that occurs in the first  few years of life. Children who are reared in stimulating environments may develop  dramatically different brain organizations than those who are reared in impoverished  environments. We saw an example of this in the orphans who were left lying on their  backs in cribs for the first 2 years of life and, as a result, were severely handicapped in  their motor development when finally freed from this restriction. Further support for  this active role in development came from Riesen’s work with dark-reared chimpan- zees, which revealed that atrophy of the neurons that make up the optic nerve led to  blindness if the young chimps were unable to see for longer than 7 months, suggest- ing that the active use of these neurons was necessary for normal visual development. Turning to the development of motor skills, dynamical systems theory clearly sees the  child as active in the development of motor skills early in life, as the infants use goals  and objectives to actively reorganize existing motor capabilities into new and more complex action systems. And, finally, we saw evidence that the adolescent’s activity can  even affect the timing of puberty. Adolescent females who are engaging in extremely  strenuous physical activity and those who are afflicted with anorexia may begin men-struating very late or stop after they have begun.
reared. For example, both heredity and environmental factors such as the food people  eat, the diseases they may contract, and even the emotional climate of their lives can  produce significant variations in the rates at which they grow and the statures they  eventually attain. We saw that the early development of the brain is the result of both  a biological program and early experiences. The effects on the timing of puberty also illustrate the interactions of nature and nurture on physical development. Both genetic influences (as demonstrated by twin and family studies) and environmental influences  (such as the cessation of pubertal development seen in girls who are involved in ex-tremely strenuous physical activity) interact to influence the timing of pubertal events.
or weeks at a time before showing spurts of more than a centimeter in a single day, a 
10/10/12   8:03 PM196    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
dramatic qualitative change. Quantitative changes mark the period of physical develop-ment during middle childhood (ages 6 to 11) when children may seem to grow very  little. This is because their rate of growth is slow and steady throughout these years. 
the effects physical development can have on social, intellectual, and psychological Finally, looking at the holistic nature of development, we saw many examples of  aspects of development in this chapter. Indeed, these effects are the reason a chapter 
SUMMARY
An Overview of Maturation and Growth
• The body is constantly changing between infancy and adulthood.
• Height and weight increase rapidly during the first 2 years.
• Growth becomes more gradual across middle childhood.
• In early adolescence there is a rapid growth spurt when height and weight again increase rapidly.
• The shape of the body and body proportions also change because various body parts grow at different rates.
 direction: structures in the upper and central regions of the body mature before those in the lower and periph-eral regions.
• Physical development follows a cephalocaudal (head downward) and a proximodistal (center outward) 
34524_ch05.indd   196
Another qualitative change concerns the body’s physical proportions. Across childhood, body shape changes from infancy to childhood, and then dramatically during the adoles-cent growth spurt and puberty, when the child takes on adult proportions. Qualitative physical changes also influence cognitive abilities (which is also an example of the holis-tic nature of development). We saw that researchers believe that the cognitive advances of adolescent experience occur only after a qualitative change in brain development in-cluding reorganizations and specializations. And of course the adolescent growth spurt and the physical changes of puberty are a clear example of a qualitative change in physi-cal development.
on physical development is included in a developmental psychology textbook! Some  examples include the fact that individual differences in the rates at which children  grow have strong consequences for their social and personality development. One  area where such differences are seen is in the changes in the structures of the brain  during adolescence, including myelinization of the higher brain centers and reorga- nizations of the neural circuitry of the prefrontal cortex that are responsible for the  dramatic changes in the types of thought that occupy adolescents as compared to  younger children. Looking at motor skill development, we saw that the dynamical  systems theory sees early motor development as a holistic enterprise, involving the  infants’ cognitive goals and objectives, leading to the reorganization of simple motor  skills into more complex motor systems. We saw that experienced crawlers and walk- ers are better able to use landmarks to guide their adventures than are infants who  have just begun to crawl or walk. This suggests that locomotion influences spatial  memory, another example of how various aspects of development work together in  a holistic manner. Turning to the physical changes of adolescence, we saw that physi- cally active girls and teenagers experience important psychological benefits such as  increased self-esteem. Furthermore, the many social and psychological implications  of maturing early or late, for both girls and boys (but in opposite directions), are more  evidence of how physical development is linked to other aspects of development in a holistic manner. 
• Skeletal and muscular development parallel the changes occurring in height and weight.
• Bones become longer and thicker and gradually harden, completing their growth and development by the late teens.
• Skeletal age is a measure of physical maturation.
• Muscles increase in density and size, particularly  during the growth spurt of early adolescence.
• Physical growth is quite uneven, or asynchronous.
• The brain, the reproductive system, and the lymph tissues mature at different rates.
10/10/12   8:03 PMCHAPTER 5 
• There are sizable individual and cultural variations in physical growth and development.
Development of the Brain
• A brain growth spurt occurs during the last 3 months of the prenatal period and the first 2 years of life.
• Neurons form synapses with other neurons.
• Glia form to nourish the neurons and encase them in myelin—a waxy material that speeds the transmis-sion of neural impulses.
• Many more neurons and synapses are formed than are needed.
• Those that are used often will survive.
• Neurons that are stimulated less often either die or lose their synapses and stand in reserve to compen-sate for brain injuries.
• Up until puberty, the brain shows a great deal of plasticity, which allows it to change in response to experience and to recover from many injuries.
• The highest brain center, or cerebrum, consists of two hemispheres connected by the corpus callosum.
• Each hemisphere is covered by a cerebral cortex.
• The brain may be lateralized at birth so that the two hemispheres assume different functions.
• Children come to rely increasingly on one particular hemisphere or the other to perform each function.
• Myelinization and reorganization of the neural circuitry of the cerebral cortex continue throughout adolescence.
Motor Development
• Like the physical structures of the body, motor devel-opment proceeds in a cephalocaudal and proximodistal direction.
• Motor skills evolve in a definite sequence.
• Infants gain control over their heads, necks, and upper arms before they become proficient with their legs, feet, and hands.
• Motor skills that infants display do not unfold according to a maturational timetable; experience is important as well.
• Institutionalized children who have few opportuni-ties to practice motor skills have retarded motor development.
• Cross-cultural research shows that motor develop-ment can be accelerated.
• According to dynamical systems theory, each new motor skill represents an active and intricate reorgani-zation of several existing capabilities that infants under-take to achieve important objectives.
• Fine motor skills improve dramatically in the 1st year.
• Prereaching is replaced by voluntary reaching.
• The clawlike ulnar grasp is replaced by the pincer grasp.
34524_ch05.indd   197
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    197
• Reaching and grasping skills transform infants into skillful manipulators.
• Emerging motor skills often thrill parents and allow new forms of play.
• Emerging motor skills support other aspects of percep-tual, cognitive, and social development.
• With each passing year, children’s motor skills improve.
• Boys become notably stronger than girls early in adolescence because of their greater muscular  development and the fact that girls are less inclined to remain physically active.
Puberty: The Physical Transition from  Child to Adult
• At about age 10½ for females and age 13 for males, the adolescent growth spurt begins.
• Adolescents grow taller and heavier.
• Adolescents’ bodies and faces assume a more adult-like appearance.
• Sexual maturation
• begins about the same time as the adolescent growth spurt and
• follows a predictable sequence.
• For girls, puberty includes
• the onset of breast and pubic-hair development,
• a widening of the hips, enlarging of the uterus and vagina,
• menarche (first menstruation), and
• completion of breast and pubic-hair growth.
• For boys, puberty includes
• development of the testes and scrotum,
• the emergence of pubic hair,
• the growth of the penis and the ability to ejaculate,
• the appearance of facial hair, and
• a lowering of the voice.
• There are great individual differences in the timing of sexual maturation.
• The secular trend refers to the fact that people in  industrialized societies are reaching sexual maturity earlier than in the past.
• People are also growing taller and heavier than  people in the past.
• The secular trend is due to improved nutrition and health care.
Causes and Correlates of Physical Development
• Physical development results from a complex interplay between biological and environmental forces.
• Individual genotypes set limits for stature, shape, and tempo of growth.
• Growth is heavily influenced by hormones released by the endocrine glands as regulated by the pituitary.
10/10/12   8:03 PM198    PART TWO  Biological Foundations of Development
• Growth hormone (GH) regulates growth through-out childhood.
• At adolescence, other endocrine glands secrete hormones.
• Estrogen from the ovaries triggers sexual develop-ment in girls.
• Testosterone from the testes instigates sexual devel-opment in boys.
• Adequate nutrition, in the form of total calories,  protein, and vitamins and minerals, is necessary for children to reach their growth potentials.
CHAPTER 5 PRACTICE QUIZ
Multiple Choice:  development by selecting the best choice for each question. Check your understanding of physical  Answers appear in the Appendix.
1. Which of the following statements about physical  development is false?
a. Babies who walk early are inclined to be especially bright.
b. The average 2-year-old is already about half of his or her adult height.
c. Half the nerve cells (neurons) in the average baby’s brain die (and are not replaced) over the first few years of life.
2. Which of the following statements about physical  development is true?
a. Most babies can walk alone, with sufficient en-couragement and practice, by the time they are 6 months old.
b. Hormones have little effect on human growth and development until puberty.
c. Emotional trauma can seriously impair the growth of young children, even those who are adequately nour-ished, free from illness, and not physically abused.
3. Physical development occurs in a head-downward direction across prenatal, child, and adolescent devel-opment. The name of this principle is the _________ principle.
a. proximodistal
b. cephalocaudal
KEY TERMS
adolescent growth spurt  187 cerebral lateralization  177
brain growth spurt  173 cerebrum  176
catch-up growth  192 corpus callosum  176
cephalocaudal development  171 deprivation dwarfism  194
cerebral cortex  176 dynamical systems theory  182
34524_ch05.indd   198
• Marasmus, kwashiorkor, and iron deficiency anemia are three growth-retarding diseases that stem from undernutrition.
• In industrialized countries, obesity is a nutritional problem, with many physical and psychological consequences.
• Chronic infectious diseases can combine with poor  nutrition to stunt physical and intellectual growth.
• Nonorganic failure to thrive and deprivation dwarf-ism illustrate that affection and sensitive, responsive caregiving are important to ensure  normal growth.
c. ossification
d. vertical
4. Which body system actually exceeds adult size during child and adolescent development?
a. Brain and head
b. General growth
c. Lymphoid
d. Reproductive
5. The _________ brain cells are the most numerous,  produce myelin, and continue to form throughout life.
a. glia
b. cerebral
c. neurons
d. synapse
6. The bundle of neural fibers that connects the two hemispheres of the brain and transmit information from one hemisphere to the other is called the
a. cerebrum.
b. cerebral cortex.
c. lateralization.
d. corpus collosum.
7. The _________ views motor development as a com-plex transaction among the child’s physical capabilities and goals and the experiences she has.
a. maturational viewpoint
b. experiential viewpoint
c. dynamical systems theory
d. transactional theory
estrogen  191 marasmus  192
glia  174 menarche  188
growth hormone (GH)  190 myelinization  175
iron deficiency anemia  192 neurons  173
kwashiorkor  192 nonorganic failure to thrive  193
10/10/12   8:03 PMCHAPTER 5 
obese  192 plasticity  174
physically active play  186 proximodistal development  171
pincer grasp  183 puberty  187
pituitary  190 secular trend  189
MEDIA RESOURCES
 instructor requires. For this book, you can access:Log  in  to  CengageBrain  to  access  the  resources  your 
tools that support the printed textbook. A textbook- specific CourseMate interactive learning, study, and exam preparation brings  course  concepts  to  life  with   website,  Psychology  CourseMate  includes  an  integrated interactive  e-book  and  other  interactive  learning  tools  including quizzes, flashcards, videos, and more.
34524_ch05.indd   199
Physical Development: The Brain, Body, Motor Skills, and Sexual Development    199
skeletal age  172 ulnar grasp  183
synapse  173 vitamin and mineral deficiency  192
synaptogenesis  174
testosterone  191
More than just an interactive study guide, WebTutor is an anytime, anywhere customized learning solution with an  e-book, keeping you connected to your textbook, instruc-tor, and classmates. 
Visit  www.cengagebrain.com account and purchase materials. to access your 
10/10/12   8:03 PMThis page has been intentionally left blank. 
Purestock/Jupiter Images
34524_ch06.indd   200 10/10/12   8:04 PM