More than just digital paper—hidden features of the PDF format 
Dietrich von Seggern 
d.seggern@callassoftware.com Vice Chair, PDF Association Berlin, Germany callas software 
Tamir Hassan 
Round-Trip PDF Solutions Member, PDF Association tamir@roundtrippdf.com Vienna, Austria 
ABSTRACT 
visual newer PDF forms. change aims However, has to presentation features, of give long print-oriented an relatively been overview such across established as few tagging, documents of a variety users the as most forms are the of and important operating familiar de and facto is security. known with format systems of these for the This for its and format’s features tutorial the robust plat-ex-and that make use of them. demonstrate the benefts of creating and exchanging PDF fles 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Applied computing → Publishing; Document  preparation; 
KEYWORDS 
PDF, Tagging, Machine-readable structure, Workfows, Document formats 
ACM Reference Format: ACM Dietrich 2019. 23–26, More Symposium 2019, von than Berlin, Seggern, just on Germany. Document digital Klaas Posselt, paper—hidden ACM, Engineering Tamir New  York, Hassan, features 2019 NY, (DocEng and of USA, the Thomas ’19), PDF 2 pages. format. September Zellmann. In 
https: //doi.org/10.1145/3342558.3351873 
1  SUMMARY 
everyone PDF is the in most the Document common  fle Engineering format on the community Web after without HTML, excep-and everyone tion has to is last machine a purely really few years, end-of-line, how processing. is deal with the format in one familiar it yet started it is dumb with Comparatively still out. PDF struggling fle But format being PDF few has “digital to that way or another. Just about shake people—and become is unsuitable paper,” of “smarter” its reputation after this for includes all, further in that the as 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or © 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6887-2/19/09. classroom for on https://doi.org/10.1145/3342558.3351873 DocEng ’19, September 23–26, 2019, Berlin, Germany For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). the proft frst or use page. commercial is Copyrights granted advantage without for third-party fee and provided that components copies that bear copies this of are this notice not work made and must the or full be distributed honored. citation 
Klaas Posselt 
digital Prepress & ePublishing Consulting klaas.posselt@einmanncombo.de Member, PDF Association Berlin, Germany 
Thomas Zellmann 
Managing Director, PDF Association thomas.zellmann@pdfa.org Berlin, Germany Foxit Europe 
even PDF—are many not DocEng familiar participants with PDF’s who additional do not features, work directly which have with grown over the past few years. 
what beyond digital representations of the printed page. they half-day important The The can interests following aim tutorial. beneft of of these this them from section However, tutorial features the generating most lists is we to and the and also introduce topics and give spend plan exchanging practical that more to the ask were audience time the examples prepared PDF audience on those fles to the on for that topics. about most how this go 
2  TOPICS 
• – Tagged PDF: Embedding logical structure in PDF for: accessibility • • 
• • • – Commenting workfows (annotations) Object-level Structured Digital, fllable forms in PDF tory and license enforcement ded fles Hidden, selectable text for scanned documents via OCR repurposing of content data metadata; (measurements, keeping source statistical information data) as for embed-his-• • • Compression Colour reproduction (if requested by audience) quality images Security: Encryption and signatures algorithms enabling small fle sizes for high-
3  ABOUT THE ORGANIZERS 
research press Dietrich and to he of the newspaper was in production German 1991 responsible projects von started ads. Seggern Newspaper in for In for his a digital 2002 reproduction a professional received project he Marketing transmission joined to his enable house. career degree callas Organization of the software He as as print head digital became a printing fles, of (ZMG), as transmission desktop involved Director and engineer, moved where pre-of in Ofcer at the PDF Association. Product related aging Director products Management, at for callas the and archiving software, subsequently industry. and Vice introduced Today, Chair and Dietrich callas’ ISO Liaison is PDF/A Man-nology landed DocEng ’19, September 23–26, 2019, Berlin, Germany Klaas on who, Posselt the following subject is a graduate of universally a number engineer of accessible lines in printing of PDF inquiry, and documents. media eventually tech-He Dietrich von Seggern, Klaas Posselt, Tamir Hassan, and Thomas Zellmann conversion tent or data). tomated creation of formatted of of formatted documents documents to structured from form structured and the con-au-standard for universally accessible PDF documents. publication trains, nels is 
document member involved Tamir including assists of Hassan engineering. in the processes and the PDF ebooks, ongoing supports has Association’s and over accessible After development move clients a decade writing towards PDF/UA as PDFs they of his and and experience new implement Competence doctoral growth web digital platforms. of in thesis and output the the Center, optimize PDF/UA area on chan-As the he of a  with Program Foxit since 2017. cessing Tamir Thomas classic in then. (EDP) 2001, is Chair He a and Zellmann regular for he has and modern worked more been has contributor than has a been for IT member 30 been solutions. Softmatic years active to working of DocEng. and in the Prior AG, the has PDF in Software to extensive Steering In electronic joining Association 2016, AG Committee he experience LuraTech/ data and was since Nix-pro-the now uments, in solutions topic the works User-Guided Printing he for worked as round-trip an and independent Information as Content a researcher processing Delivery Extraction researcher in of academia, PDF Laboratory from documents and consultant Print-Oriented and of more HP (i.e. Labs. both recently ofering Doc-the He  archives/libraries dorf tion’s activities. sociation, among Thomas others. segments. coordinates Thomas focuses As and Managing executes on the Director banking/insurance many of of the the organiza-PDF and As-