Creating PDF/UA The PDF/UA Competence Center
An assertion of PDF/UA conformance places stringent demands on both document authoring software and the author responsible for the conformance status of a particular document. In PDF, text strings of arbitrary lengths may occur in almost any content stream for a wide variety of more-or-less unfortunate reasons. Developers can take very little for granted, but PDF/UA ensures a focus on what matters for accessibility purposes. PDF/UA makes it possible to deliver  Competence Center to discuss strategies, develop educational Within the PDF Association, accessibility experts, PDF develogether in the PDF/UA  material and research technical implementation details. We identify opportunities to speak at conferences and organize webinars or in-person-events to educate developers, policy makers and end users about PDF/UA.  -
opers and supporters of PDF/UA work t PDF/UA
ISO 14289: The new standard  for universally accessible  PDF documents and forms
accessible content with the reliability that is a hallmark of PDF.  Join the PDF/UA Competence Center!
To comply with PDF/UA, all content on the PDF page must be correctly categorized as artifact or real content. All real con If your organization is already a member of the PDF tivities in the PDF  consider joining the conversation and ac Association,  and a tags tree provided, to indicate the logical reading order specific technical requirements for font embedding and tly characterized in semantic terms 
equirements. , including several  of the document. Association’s PDF/UA Competence Center – just send an email to If your organization cannot become a member of the PDF ormation or to sign up right away.  Association you may still join as an individual and become part of the PDF/UA Competence Center’s meetings, discussions, public events and development efforts. Again, just send an email to info@pdfa.org for more information. █- When is a PDF universally accessible?
tent must then be correc
info@pdfa.org for more inf █ What should PDF developers know?
█ Where does PDF/UA make a difference?
High quality input PDF files are required
character encoding  , among other r
Using PDF/UA
Membership in the PDF Association
Conformance with ISO 14289 enables a top-quality reading and navigating experience with all types of conforming assistive technology. Organizations can use PDF/UA as part of their overall strategy to comply with applicable accessibility laws, regulations or best practices. PDF/UA enables…
Founded in 2006, the PDF Association exists to promote the , PDF/UA, elop adoption and implementation of International Standards for PDF technology.  The activities of the PDF Association most influential association for PDF to shape what PDF will ou wish to participate in the  look like in the future, please get in touch:
the PDF standard itself as well as PDF/A, PDF/E cover  
 PDF/ VT and PDF/X. We wor  k closely with ISO on the dev -
█Access to content in a structured, logical reading order complete with applicable semantics███Text reuse (copy & paste, automated content extraction)Enhanced search resultsHigh-quality results when accessing PDF content on mobile devices, smart-phones,  e-readers and tablet PCs ment of future PDF standards. If y
Standards e.V.  Association for  Digital Document erlin 
– PDF Association – aße 14  Neue Kantstr14057 B
Consumers of PDF/UA conforming PDF files include PDF readers, screen readers, magnification and text re-flow tools, Braille printers, text-to-speech (TTS) systems, content reuse and re-purposing implementations as well as search engines.
 Tel: +49 30 39 40 50-0  ·  Fax: +49 30 39 40 50-99  
www.pdfa.org  ·  info@pdfa.org ·  Registered in: Berlin, District Court of Berlin-Charlottenburg, VR 26099 B  ·  VAT ID: DE251189066 Photo © 2009 by Jake Davies · ojisanjake.blogspot.de
PDF Association · www.pdfa.orgWhat is PDF/UA? Why does the world need PDF/UA? PDF/UA is a reality. What are you going to do about it?
standard approved in 2012,  PDF/UA defines how to represent PDF/UA is the common name for ISO 14289. An international cessible. The standard identifies PDF comelevant to this objective and provides electronic documents in the PDF format in a manner that al Tagged PDF first entered the market well over a decade ago. tagging and content reuse, the core PDF language includes PDF is highly capable but internally complex. Regarding  significant ambiguities that have led to confusion and reWhy do we need an ISO standard for this PDF feature?was on providing accurate and reliable on-screen and printed requirements and restrictions on the form of their use.ned for accessibility; the focus  results for page-based content. In 2000 the PDF specification was extended by a mechanism called “tagging” to make it possible to add structure and semantics to page content. PDF/UA defines the correct use of PDF tagging for maximum accessibility.
slow to find broad acceptance. Today, over 70% of PDFs proaccessibility and reuse mechanism for PDF content has been For these and other reasons high-quality tagged PDF has been operability. Market pressure for a reliable content building for years, but key public-sector regulations to-date have tended to provide guidance in HTML and web-specific terms, leaving implementers without clear guidance on how to ensure the PDF files they create are made both reliable and accessible in the assistive technology context. PDF/UA is coming soon, and there’s something for everyone:(WCAG 2.0) project, AIIM and Adobe Systems started the ’s Web Content Accessibility Guidelines PDF/UA Committee in 2004 to explore and develop specific technical requirements for accessible PDF. Following the ISO standardization of PDF in 2008, the working document was redrafted to use ISO 32000 and PDF/UA began development towards publication as an ISO standard. In 2010, PDF/UA was accepted as an ISO New Work Item. In 2012, 
- while those PDFs that are tagged are frequently substandard. ers are still completely untagged,  As a consequence, most users who rely on tags in PDF to read have learned to dislike PDF files for the unreliable, 
lows the file to be ac - ███software, office programs and publishing toolsAuthoring software used to create PDF files, including OCR Reader software used to process a PDF file for use in a viewer Editing software used to modify or tag existing PDF files or other consumer implementation
ponents and properties r █Assistive Technology software used interactively with PDF readers to provide access to users with disabilities
-
duced inter
PDF was not originally desig
PDF/UA may soon be a requirement – or a “suggestion” – for your organization or its customers. It’s time to know more.
In parallel with W3C -
duced on desktop comput
How can we help?
disjoint  ed  Members and non-members alike will always find the PDF Association website, www.pdfa.orgThe organization has made available video recordings and extensive internal resources and active collaboration in the work of renowned experts, .   slides of technical presentations regarding  PDF/UA from the PDF/UA Competence Center. PDF Association’s 2012 Technical Conference.  Members of the PDF 
and grossly unsatisfactory experience they’ve so often  received.  ,  a good place to start
 PDF/ UA publishes   PDF/UA delivers enhanced communications as ISO 14289. to persons with disabilities
Association benefit fr  om a net
PDF/UA makes the world a better place referenced by equal access legislation and policies in Europe, (and near-conforming) readers and assistive technology.PDF/UA will offer demonstrable high-quality results to end-usNorth America and elsewhere, whether for government agenIt is t ted that the PDF/UA standard will soon be ailable PDF/UA conforming  -
private sector. regulations, reducing liability exposure.ers with disabilities using readily-aor any comprehensive organization-wide strategy to ensure onform with applicable accessibility t regulations or organizations in the v
██Increases likelihood that content provided in the PDF format is more accessible to more people than ever before
Establishes the technical requirements necessary to encourage █Provides an Idevelopment of accessible PDF creation and reading software   o be expec
nternational Standard to guide software procure███Implies eligibility for the “A” conformance level of PDF/A, the WCAG 2.0 in PDF contentEnables high quality, reliable reuse and re-purposing of PDFsReduces liability exposure and minimizes legal uncertaintyovides a technically-specific road-map to conformance with  widely adopted ISO standard for PDF based archiving - -
█ Prment and development cies, public procuremen
PDF/UA will quickly becf ome an indispensable building block 
documents and for  ms c